Day 1:

Note for day one but also overall: we have to define what the inner critic is and what it isn't. Give some context as a foundation to talk about things later. Like a basic understanding in laymans terms, keep the complicated language far away and the pedagogical value engagement and interest HIGH! but always come back to what resonates for me, what's compelling?

Intro:
Start with a story. How can I present this in an interactive way? read and click? make images in a video to the story? like a cutscene
I want to replace this story with something of my own or something madeup. 

Gonna do a movie here for the meat of the first section. 

"I've had a real bad case of low self-esteem. 

Even back when I was a kid, it drove my piano teachers crazy. I had a lot of talent, the ear for music, the fast fingers and the competent left hand...but my confidence wasn't like ever there really. I refused to get on stage or play in a band (even though I kinda wanted to) and excel at something I was obviously meant to do. And wanted to. 

Years slipped by, and I settled for jobs that didn't demand much of my actual capabilities. I just simply accepted the story that I wasn't meant for anything greater. Whenever that old spark flared up, whenever he felt the urge to reach out and actually build or do something ambitious, a visceral sinking feeling like a gray cloud just settled in and over him and blind him to the possiblities until he let go and surrendered the idea. 

Through what he perceived as a miracle he managed to land a gig as a composer for a game. One afternoon during a meeting, the team he was working with were analyzing their steam next fest demo period. Magnus expressed that the steam reviews didn't like the music that he had produced and the team checked him. 
"What do you mean", said the team, "I'm not reading that, where are you reading that?". His team even found evidence to the contrary.

Suddenly something clicked, he recognized and clearly saw the critical voice saying things like "You aren't any good. You can't do it. They don't like you. Just give up". 
He had always just belived this to be the truth and had never viewed this harmful self-talk as something separate. 

He remembered how he had wanted to express himself and really show what he could do in front of and together with others, but this voice spoke with such force that he never dared. 

Magnus had just met his inner critic."

In all my work with people, one of the things that surprises me over and over again is how much our internal critic slows us down and prevents us from having the life that we want. And I see this everywhere, whether it's the dozens of people that I get to work with in person, people who take these courses or in other professional collaborations, this internal critic has become something that is just stifling our lives. and weirdly at the exact same time they think they need it to be productive. So we're going to go into where that critic came from, what it is, what's actually going on there, how to work with it, and how that relationship with your internal critic can completely change if you do a few simple things. So before we get into it, let's first define inner critic.

So you can call it negative self talk, you can call it um critical voice in the head, you can just call it negative thoughts that you're having or thoughts that are telling you you have to do something to be better. It might say, "Hey, don't forget to do this. Don't forget to do this. You got to do this. Don't forget to do this while you're doing something." So it's literally nagging you to do something else while you're doing something and it's incessant or it's telling you, "Oh, you're no good. You should die. What's wrong with you? Why did you screw that up?" or it's constantly going back over the past saying, "Why didn't you do it this way? Why didn't you do it that way? Why didn't you do it this way? Or you could do this better? Why are you 20 years old and you don't have a girlfriend? Why is it that you're 40 years old and you don't have a house? Look at all these other people who can make money of their game and you can't." And so it's just whack, whack, whack over and over again with this negative self-t talk. So that's the thing that we're talking about. We're talking about having that voice in your head that's constantly riding you.

Now having an inner voice is normal, it's is called introspection and is different from this critical self-talk. Humans spend about one-third to one-half of waking life not in the present. It's so common that in sciency neurological terms it's called the default state. We do mental timetravel which is helpful for making sense of stuff and planning. The inner critic is more cyclical negative thoughts and emotions. The negative talk turns our normal capacity into a curse that affects performance, decision-making and is a common cause for stress and burnout. 

So if it sucks so much, why do we have it? 
To answer that question let's look back in time. Imagine two groups of your ancestors out roaming on the savanna with loin clothes and spears, you get the point. One of the groups are chill, laidback thinking that "eh don't worry, we don't have to go out hunting NOW we have plenty of food", "Damn look at Dave, he's sleeping instead of gathering berries what a legend". The other group is worried, unhappy, constantly looking out for threats and ways to improve, thinking they could do better all the time. "What if we can't find the zebras?", I'm so shit at hunting I have to get better at hunting.", "I'm tired but I need to fucking get out there and push to keep find more berries because what if we don't have enough food"

Which of the groups has a better chance at surviving? My money is on group 2. So from an evolutionary perspective, rumination and negative anticipation aren't bugs; they are features. Our ancestors survived because their brains constantly scanned past mistakes and catastrophic future scenarios to keep them alive on the savanna. The issue is that we don't live in that context and survival isn't an issue for us anymore, but our whole system is wired for it. That leads to us feeling threatened or stressed or even depressed without sometimes really understanding why. 


After we've defined it and understood why we have it it can be important to focus on YOUR inner critic. Let's do the TEST!

Different critics have different motivations, I like that because identifying the type can help you know what the goal of hte critic is. But labeling like this can be helpful and unhelpful, remember that this isn't gospel and you can make up names and characteristics of your own inner critics. These types are just guidelines, not cages; one critic can be a mix of types."

at the end of the test Remember the inner critic isn't all of you, you're bigger than that. What we're highlighting here is not the whole you.
If the critic is treated as who you are, it will look like reality."

Now as we said before. Not all self-talk is critical. You can keep talking to yourself; that's not the problem. The problem is that this normal talk has been hijacked. And that's what we're gonna have a look at next 

--> the voice in your head exercise. 

EXERCISE DAY 1!

You've now looked at  what the inner critic is, different ways the inner critic can show up and mapped your own.

SEGWAY to day 2:
If you stop here, it's likely you'll fall into a common trap: Fighting fire with fire. The inner critic really feels like a bad guy right? So it can feel natural to try and kill it, hate it, judge it and critize it back and I get that. In day 2 we'll look at why that doesn't work. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Day 2:
The upsides and downsides. What it costs and why it sticks. 

"The same inner voice can be our best coach and our worst critic. That tension is the central puzzle of the book.
The critic is the useful voice in a destructive mode, not a separate organ." Introspection when distressed often does more harm than good: we go inside hoping for an inner coach and find an inner critic. Thoughts do not automatically save us from thoughts.
The bind: the skill that should help is what generates chatter when used without distance.

"The inner voice is a multitasker: it supports working memory (phonological loop), helps self-control by internalizing caretaker instructions (Vygotsky), monitors goals, runs simulations, and weaves autobiographical identity.
Self-talk exists because it is useful as coach, planner, and identity-maker."

Stress is adaptive until it stays on. The negative verbal stream can keep the threat system firing just by thinking, with costs down to inflammation-related gene expression. Repetitive negative thinking is a transdiagnostic risk factor; chatter is not the same as clinical depression.

Thought itself can sustain threat in the body.

This following quote is tied to the yips from the Rick ankiel example. Not sure how or if to use yet. I'm not talking to athletes but I'll have to find analogies that work and can maybe base it on this. 
"On court there are two selves: Self 1, the conscious 'I' that instructs and then evaluates, and Self 2, the 'myself' that performs the action.
Self-talk is a teller talking to a doer, which is why inner conflict can wreck a known stroke." 

THis next quote travels the same path that Joe talks about, the voice can also be sneaky. Instead of overtly critical it can be covertly mistrusting in the sense of "you should do this, you can do this, and have you thought about this?"
"Self 1's repetitive commands treat Self 2 as deaf, forgetful, or stupid. Self 2 hears everything, never forgets, and after doing something once already knows which muscles to use again.
Endless verbal reminders express mistrust and clutter the mind."

This IFS quote is great here. I'm thinking maybe putting this at the end? People with strong inner critics do have the resitance toward compassion, remember the study? Maybe talking about the downs first an the ups last. or atleast the compassion last is good. maybe THIS is the segway to day 3?"The Inner Critic's attacks are distorted attempts to help. It thinks judging will protect you from failure, humiliation, rejection, or abandonment. All parts, including the critic, are trying to help.
Positive intent is the hinge: you do not have to banish the critic; you can discover what it thinks it is doing."

EXERCISE DAY 2:
The W's
Self criticism is a common strategy for us to deal with discomfort or as a way to move forward in life when we haven't learned other strategies to manage ourselves. As we develop new strategies to deal with this it's also important to kindof "honor" and understand the strategies we have today. What's the win of doing it the way I'm currently doing it?

Use the list from day 1 or make a new one. Try to examine what you believe would happen if the inner critic disappeared. What about that would scare you the most?
Often when asked that question people answer: "Nothing! it would be fucking wonderful!!" but there's a reason that you have the critical voice in your head and that reason is what we're interested in. There's probably not only one but several fears behind the voice. Here are some examples that I meet frequently and that I experience myself: "By being selfcritical I prevent mistakes from happening (fear of failure)", "If I don't critize myself I won't improve (fear of feeling what???)" or "If I'm self critical then I prevent others from critizing me first (fear of rejection)"

The L's
You've most likely already noticed that the critical self talk doesn't feel great. But few people actually sit down and clearly view and feel the effects of the inner critic. If you're used to minimizing (others have it worse, I'm used to it) this can be particularly important because it most likely means you've been ignoring what the discomfort is trying to tell you. This part can feel kinda shit tbh because it means really looking at the hurt and accepting that for a truth. It's not comfortable admitting to yourself that you have issues. So be kind to yourself here.  

---------------------------------------------------------

day 3: 
More focus on how to find helpful ways to work with the inner voice.
You deserve
to feel good about yourself without having to earn it.

"The way to beat chatter is not to stop talking to yourself. The challenge is to talk to yourself more effectively, using tools in your habits, relationships, and environment.

Silence is the wrong goal; skillful inner conversation is the goal."

"Distraction can improve mood short-term but is a Band-Aid: the wound is hidden, not healed. Distancing is not avoidance; the point is to engage the problem from a zoomed-out perspective.
Neither suppressing nor merely watching thoughts float by is Kross's method."

I'm not quite sure how to work in the inner game of tennis quite yet. I like the work with letting intuition do the work though. Helping self 1 focus on a focus task which quiets it. "Every game has an outer game (external opponent, obstacles, goal) and an inner game played in the mind against lapses in concentration, nervousness, self-doubt, and self-condemnation.
Mastery requires training the neglected inner skills that stop mental habits from blocking performance."

I guess this next quote tangents the silence is not the goal, skillful inner converstaion is the goal (maybe), not sure yet. 
"Self 2 is the body, brain, memory, and nervous system — an automatic doer with staggering inner intelligence that already knows a natural learning process (as in walking and talking). Interference needs to be unlearned, not a new method installed.
The job is to stop blocking competence rather than to micromanage it."

is the goal of this course to involve the flow of the body? I'm not sure. I'll keep this quote here for now. "The prime factor in translating technique into effective action is the relationship between Self 1 (conscious teller) and Self 2 (unconscious automatic doer).
Knowing how to hit is not the bottleneck; harmony or mistrust between the two selves is."

I like this next one from the inner game of tennis though, I can mention that the focus is NOT to pep talk yourself with overtly positive thinking. "The Inner Game is the art of quieting Self 1 so the mind is still and at one with the body — not a campaign to replace Self 1's criticism with positive pep talk.
Players already know they should be confident; the missing skill is stilling the instructing mind."
This touches on the same subject, teh same that Andy puddicombe talks about when leaving to become a monk at the monastary. He traveled the whole world and then went how dare my inner demons follow me to the other side of the planet! 
"Several studies had shown that when people find themselves sucked into negative verbal thinking, diverting their attention away from their problems
improved the way they felt. The downside of this approach,7 however, is that distraction constitutes a short-term fix—a Band-Aid that obscures the wound
without healing it. If you go to the movies to escape the adversities of real life, your problems are still there waiting for you when you leave the theater. Out of sight, in other words, isn’t actually out of mind, because the negative feelings remain, eagerly waiting to be activated again."

Another quote from the innergame which I'm not sure I'm keeping, I think it's starting to feel a bit convoluted. I need to draw the line somewhere but it still talks the same talk as kinda silence is not the job we have to find a different way to relate to it. "Peak play is 'mindless' in the sense of not giving oneself instructions or replaying mistakes — not unconsciousness. The player is more aware of ball and court, but is not thinking how to hit.
The goal is concentrated awareness without the inner instructor, not zoning out."

mention something about we change the way we relate and the perspective but we're not changing the real life events around us. Like we can change the internal critic about an event that's going on but we can't necessarily change the fact that we're going to stand infront of a crowd playing baseball on national tv. 

Recall in The Wizard of Oz when
Dorothy and her friends went to see the wizard, the Great and Terrible
Oz, they saw a variety of images that were formidable and frightening.
However, these images were all just projected by a little man behind a
screen to make himself seem powerful. He didn’t actually have any
magical powers at all. That is the way it often is with our Inner Critics.
They are projections on the screens of our minds.
Many Inner Critics are things we learned when we were young. You may have been in a family
situation where you were judged, harmed, or rejected. So you learned that the
only way to protect you was to judge you, in an effort to shape you into
becoming what your family wanted. The inner critic judged you as a way to
stop you from being hurt, so it puffed itself up and began to attack you.
This part wasn’t innately a nasty Critic. It started out with more noble
characteristics—such as clarity, strength, assertiveness, or energy—
before it took on this judgmental role. 

EXERCISE DAY 3
This next bit is good because it creates a tie back to part 1 but also a chance to develop some compassion at this stage. Turn the undersatnding into compassion!!The gram and youtube is full of "live in the present" sentiment. It's good advice. Instead of succumbing to the pain of the past or anxiety of the future we get the advice that we should focus on the here and now. With ourselves and connection with others. And yet, humans weren’t made to be in the present all the time. That’s just not what our brains evolved to do. 

We've now mapped our critical talk and also seen the wins and losses of keeping it. Now let's look at what we can actually do to change stuff.

Being judgemental or critical against the critical voice creates threat in our system (remember day 1?) carousel metaphor?
It's like arguing with someone who's already annoyed or irritated. Next time your partner is angry try saying "calm down you're so annoying when you're angry" and send me some pics of you the couch you'll be sleeping on. 

It's important to get to know your inner critic however, if it's clearly connected to a critical parent or someone who abused you then meeting it with compassion is trickier. It can work but here getting in touch with anger and laying down boundaries toward the critical voice can be much more fruitful. 

(I'm not sure if I should use this here. I mean it's been really helpful for me to categorize and talk about self 1 and self 2 when the goal is to allow for more intuition and flow. Is that the goal here? If yes then this quote is useful, if no idk...I love it because it makes it understandable in a way laymen understand. "Self 1 is the conscious ego-mind: the teller, instructor, and critic that issues how-to commands, seeks approval, avoids disapproval, and sits in judgment over Self 2.
More tips, pep, and self-correction often increase interference instead of skill")


((( 

We talk to ourselves.
And we listen to what we say.

do I keep these here or as downsides in part 2? Biological Impact of Chronic Threat
"Chatter-fueled stress keeps the fight-or-flight alarm active, leading to the long-term activation of inflammation genes."

Death at the Molecular Level
"A term used by Steve Cole to describe how chronic psychological threat triggers gene expression that harms the body long-term."

The Impact of Chatter on Learned Tasks
"A phenomenon where a skill one has mastered breaks down because a negative inner voice hijacks the person's focus."

Dual Task Interference
"The neurological jamming of executive functions that occurs when one must simultaneously perform a task and listen to a pained inner voice."

The Magical Number Four
"A concept illustrating the limited capacity of executive functions, typically allowing the mind to hold only between three and five units of information at once."

Unlinking
"A breakdown in performance that occurs when the inner voice shines a spotlight too brightly on the individual physical components of an automatic, scripted behavior."

Impact of Anxiety on Negotiations
"Research shows it leads to lower initial offers, exiting discussions early, and earning less money due to disrupted focus."

Chatter in Academic Performance
"Repetitive anxious thoughts that act as a saboteur, leading students to perform worse on tests."

Social Sharing Paradox
"The irony where people feel compelled to talk to others about negative experiences to find support, but excessive sharing ends up pushing listeners away."

Chatter and Aggression
"Stewing over conflicts keeps negative feelings alive, making individuals more likely to act aggressively or displace aggression onto innocent bystanders."

Impairment of Working Memory
"A consequence of chatter where self-talk consumes the linguistic neural pathways needed for productive daily functions."

In recent years, cutting-edge methods that examine how the brain processes information and allow us to monitor behavior in real time have unlocked the
hidden mechanics of the human mind. In doing so, they have uncovered something remarkable about our species: We spend one-third to one-half of our
waking life not living in the present As naturally as we breathe, we “decouple” from the here and now, our brainstransporting us to past events, imagined scenarios, and other internal musings.This tendency is so fundamental it has a name: our “default state.”5 It is the activity our brain automatically reverts to when not otherwise engaged, and often even when we are otherwise engaged. You’ve no doubt noticed your own mind wander, as if of its own volition, when you were supposed to be focusing on a task. We are perpetually slipping away from the present into the parallel, nonlinear world of our minds, involuntarily sucked back “inside” on a minute-to-minute basis. In light of this, the expression “the life of the mind” takes on new
and added meaning: Much of our life is the mind. So, what often happens when we slip away?)))

