In my career, there's been a thousand times where I've met somebody who is deeply ambitious, where they want to achieve great things, even just big things, but they get constantly held back because they doubt themselves. And the secret that nobody tells you is that there are very successful people. I work with some of the most successful people in Silicon Valley and they all have doubt too. The only difference is that they listen to that signal, the signal of doubt and they know what to do with it rather than to let it stop them. These are the two places typically where the doubt arises. One is just when you're thinking about living into it and the other one is when you get a reaction that you don't particularly want. The first one is you're handed a project or you have a project that you want to start and you get excited about it. You're, you know, thrilled maybe a little But you're like, "Woo, let's do this project." And then you put some ideas together. You sit with the ideas and then doubt shows up. The second place where doubt typically arises is then you put it in front of somebody. Maybe it's your boss or maybe it's an investor or maybe it's your husband and you put this idea out. You make a presentation or you just talk about it and you see that they aren't completely bought into the idea. So in either case, what's happening is that you have an ambition, which means you want to move something forward and you're scared that there's going to be a feeling that arises in you that you don't want to feel. And the doubt is coming up as a way to protect you from that feeling. And typically there's two ways in which that happens. It is a feeling from your past that you don't want to relive. And the second one is that there's a feeling of maybe in failure or an accomplishment of that ambition which you're scared will rock you. And so in either case, whether it's a a feeling that's from your past or whether it's a feeling that you potentially will feel. They're both emotions that you're trying not to feel which are creating that doubt. So, let let me explain to you how that works and then also show you a trick in a bit that's going to allow you to prove to yourself that this is about emotions. And it's really not about the logic that your doubt is telling you it's about. So, the first one, the the one about feeling something from your past, the way it happened for me was my dad would just criticize me all the time. So, maybe it was because he drank too much the day before or his blood sugar was bad or maybe because he didn't understand what I was doing. and I would say something, oh, here's my idea, and I'd get criticized for it. Or maybe he would even get angry at me for it. And as a kid, what you think is, oh, if I'm being criticized, I must have done something wrong. What do I do to fix it? What did I do wrong? And so, that's the doubt. That's where the doubt comes from. And you can see this all the time. There are some people that I see some executives and whenever anybody gets angry at them, they go right into doubt. or if somebody's critical of them, they go right into doubt instead of saying, "Oh, wait, maybe how much do you understand the whole thing?" Or, "Uh, right." So, they don't get it, but most people don't get it. It's a new idea. That makes sense. They don't do any of that stuff. They just boom, go into doubt because they don't want to feel that friction because that's what they learned as a kid is that if I am feeling that friction, it means I must have done something wrong and what do I do to adjust? The other way that we go to doubt that we don't want to feel it is, okay, I'm going to do this thing and I might fail. Oh my gosh, I'm going to feel horrible about myself. I don't want to feel horrible about myself, so I'm going to go into doubt or I might succeed. And then the person who I think I am, the person who's struggling, I won't be that person anymore. I'll be the person who's actually winning. And though a big part of my system wants it, there's also a part of me that's scared. Like, will I lose my ambition if I'm winning? Will I lose the people who love me? Will I be the tall puppy that gets cut if I'm winning? And so there's lots of reasons that you can have a fear of success or a fear of failure and that brings up emotions that you don't want to feel. And so you go into doubt because what the doubt is doing is it's slowing your ambition. So you're not going to have to feel the thing. You're not going to have to take the risk of having somebody get angry at you or somebody criticizing you or feeling like you're the tall poppy or feeling like you're a complete failure. And so you just have doubt and then that slows the process down and then you don't do the thing and you don't have to feel that. The only thing you have to feel is disappointment with yourself which typically you're used to feeling. You've been feeling it for years. So that's the safe bet. And so that's where you go right about now. What's happening is like, "No, Joe, this isn't about feeling an emotion. I actually just don't know if something is right or something is wrong. So let's talk about why that isn't true. Why it's not true is because you don't know if it's right or wrong. You you cannot know if you're right or wrong. How could you? You haven't done the thing before. If you've done the thing before, you knew how to do it. There would be no doubt. You also would have already felt all the emotions you would have to feel for doing the thing, right? You've done it before. You felt the thing before. There's no issue. So, it must be that you don't actually know the answer. And of course, you don't know the answer. There's no way that you can know how to do anything perfectly. they do it the right way. The only thing that you can do is just do it and then do it better and then do it better and iterate and learn and grow. That's the only way this gets done. But all of that stops if you are worried about feeling a certain way. If you have doubt, then you stop the iteration. You stop the process. So the only way to get to intellectual clarity is to actually do it. You can take your best guess, but you're going to fail sometimes. Everybody fails sometimes if they're doing anything of significance. And intellectually you know that but you're still being stopped. And that's why we know it's an emotional thing. But the other way we know it's an emotional thing. It's about avoiding an emotional state is that when you learn what to do when you're avoiding an emotional state and you see that it brings you to clarity, boom, it becomes very clear. If you can say, "Oh, I can't wait for somebody to criticize me." The doubt goes away. If you say, "I can't wait to feel like a failure." The doubt goes away. If you say, "I can't wait to feel that massive success," the doubt goes away. And so, let's do an experiment that shows you exactly what I'm talking about. So, there's this great quote, and I think it is from some place in South America where it basically says, "Doubt is the sin of the heart." So, what does that mean, doubt is the sin of the heart? It means that your heart has to be closed to have doubt. So heart closed means that we're defending against something. And in this case, we're defending against an emotion. So if you open your heart and then you go into the thing that you have doubt about, something different happens. So before we go there, a lot of people are going to be thinking, "What do you mean open your heart, Joe?" Think about it like this. Think of something that you just love, that you just adore. Maybe it's a puppy or a kid or a person or a place or a tree. Just something that just makes you feel h I love being in the presence of this thing. And that is what it means to open your heart. And so your job is to love being in the presence of the thing that's creating doubt. So if you open your heart to the doubt and just sit there. So let's go ahead and do it. You open your heart to the thing that you're doubting. So, pick a moment, pick a thing in your life right now that you have doubt around, anything. And then put your hand right there on your heart. So, you're remembering. It's just to help you remember to open your heart. Drop the defense and look at that thing, that doubt, that thing you're doubting. Look at it the way that you look at that kid or that puppy just with that. welcoming that openness. Take a deep breath in. Really drop the defense. Open your heart. What happens to the doubt? Where does it go? So immediately what we see is that as we open, as we welcome, the doubt starts drifting away. And we might not know everything to do in that moment, but we know the next step. You know right now what the next step is because you opened your heart to it. And if you don't, you know that you'll know the next step if you sit there with an open heart long enough, right? Because you're welcoming it. So that's how it works. But in the long term, it's really important to feel the actual emotion that you're avoiding to really feel what is it like? Oh, to have somebody angry at me. How do I welcome that? to have somebody criticize me or be passive aggressive. How do I welcome that? To have my boss go, "No, you're an idiot." How do I welcome that? And there's intellectual ways to do that. There is, oh, every time I'm triggered, I know that there's something that is holding back my freedom. And I can actually love being triggered. And I actually love being triggered because I know, oh, on the other side of that trigger, if I do the work, I'm going to find freedom. So, of course, I love it. It's like finding the beginning of a gold mine. I have to do a little digging, but man, if I know that there's gold down there, I'm going to take it. And so, how do you really love the fact that you find this thing that you don't want to feel? Because you know, if you can enjoy feeling it, there's going to be a lot more freedom in your world. So, there's the intellectual way of doing it, but the other way to do it is to do something that we call emotional inquiry. We have a whole podcast on it. We have an exercise that you can download on it. You can just look below where you're bringing wonder where you're bringing just that childlike excitement and curiosity to the emotional experience. So you're literally what does it feel like in my body? How do I how do I play with this thing? Is it dense? Is it what color is it? How does it move? What's the sensation of the emotion? where you're really bringing that wonder, that deep wonder into the emotional experience so that you can start really learning how to welcome it. Because the thing about emotions generally is that if you resist the emotions, they're really uncomfortable. It's like resisting going to the bathroom. It's really uncomfortable. Going to the bathroom, not so uncomfortable. Feeling the emotion, not so uncomfortable. It's really simple. Or you can also intellectually just see that it could be really exciting to welcome this emotional experience. And so if you are in doubt, you can open your heart. Make sure that you're not committing a sin of the heart by closing your heart and allowing yourself to accept any kind of emotional experience that you're having, which really means accepting yourself as you are. [Music]

In this coaching session that happened during one of our live Q&amp;As's, we meet a woman who's really struggling with allowing herself to be seen and to share her story. And when we work, we find out what's actually underneath it. And it's not what you'd think. I'm like kind of nervous. Um, so, uh, something that I'm looking to get more comfortable with is, um, like sharing my story and sharing personal information with people. Um, I have been doing it a bit and lately I've noticed that it like registers as a really big threat in my mind. How how much more comfortable do you want to become? Um, completely comfortable. Okay. And how comfortable are you currently? Um, from zero to 100%. I would say I'm at like 25% and I would want to be at uh I would consider 75% to be totally comfortable. Okay, great. So, you're literally raising your hand in front of some 200 people to do a what is clearly going to be a deep coaching session. I mean, you could pre prevent it from being a deep coaching session, but I don't think you would raise your hand unless you wanted a deep coaching session that is being filmed and is going to be distributed to far more than these 200 people and that's 25%. Well, I'm I'm definitely not comfortable at the moment. So, Ah, okay. So, to be specific, it's not that you don't do it, it's that you're not comfortable doing it. Exactly. Yeah, I have been doing it quite a bit. Oh, great. So, what makes you need to be comfortable? Um, what if what if being uncomfortable is the best way to share your story? That seems um like it makes sense. Yeah, let's try it out. Um, give me like a one paragraph story about yourself. That's uh he's got like a 50% charge. You're sharing it to me, but you're also sharing it to everybody. Okay. So I um I have been running groups where um I'm talking about addiction and sharing some of my like perspectives and ways of thinking about it with um anyone who shows up. Um and I have personal experience with people who um Great. So what what's happening in your system right now? Are you trying to overcome the discomfort? Are you fully in the discomfort? Are you comfortable and discomfort's not happening? What of those three things is going on? I feel kind of like like sort of out of body experience. Cool. And is that is that is that what happens when you're uncomfortable or when you're trying to be comfortable? I think when I'm trying to be comfortable. Okay. So try to be Yeah. See what it's like to like instead there's this discomfort feeling in you. I want you to like sit in that discomfort. Walk right into the middle of it and then speak from there. like try to speak from not even try speak from the discomfort rather than from the desire to overcome it. Okay. Um, so I am uncomfortable describing um my own experiences with addiction. And um so when I get speaking about what um I want to share, I've noticed that I won't say what I actually want to say about it. What do you want to say about it? Stay in the discomfort. Oh man. Um, what I want to say about it is I think that there's a lot of really stupid, unhelpful things that people recommend and prescribe and um I'm kind of pissed off about the fact that I was influenced by those things. Yeah. Wow. All of a sudden something something just shifted. Everybody could feel that shift. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um notice notice something. So just you've you've suffered the addiction. Is that correct? Yeah. Yeah. Great. So notice that there's a parallel happening. What did you have to do to actually get you through the addiction? What did I do after after all you all the bad advice you played with blah blah blah blah blah. What was the actual movement that was like that brought you here today? I refused to do anything that was harmful to me. Great. So that's what's happening now. Okay. Holding back your truth is harmful for you. It literally it looked like you opened the tap and you came out when you started saying I think there's stupid things that people tell you to blah blah blah blah blah. Like it was like boom, you were you were with us. All of a sudden I was with you. I wasn't with your mask. I wasn't with the trying. I wasn't with the trying not to try. You're just right there. You stopped doing harmful things to you in addiction. I assume like you popped out like the same way. Yeah. Yeah, I I did. Um and it wasn't taken well by many people around me. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. Takes a village to make an addict. Yeah. That one hit you. You stopped letting that hit you. What? What? What? It takes a village to make an addict. Yeah, that made me kind of angry. Huh. So that's the other thing I'm noticing is the thing that's your truth that you often don't speak has some has some anger in it. When you felt angry, you stopped it right now. When you like when you did pop out, you were just like I think there's some stupid things. There's there's an anger there. Yeah, right. That probably was suppressed as a kid. That probably helped the addiction occur. Even right now, I see that it's being held when you were waiting in line like in the you had this kind of like you, you're not going to pick me like this is stupid whole thing going on. Is that what it looked like? Yeah. Kind of despond a little despondent teenager. That was kind of what it looked like. Yeah. Huh. Interesting. Yeah. And then I talked about my wife and you smiled like something lit up in you. I was like, "Oh, there's something underneath the despondent teenager. Let's go find out what it is." Huh. Yeah. Oh, there. What? What? What just happened? Huh? What? What? You were smiling. What just happened? What's happening is the anger is turning into sadness really fast. Yeah. But I don't think that it's sadness. It's all of it. Beneath the anger that wasn't allowed is a sadness that wasn't allowed. There's a joy that wasn't allowed. It's just layers of There's just layers of you that weren't allowed. Right. Yeah. That you are currently not allowing even like in this moment. You you got taught how to be your own oppressor. And you're learning how to break free by telling your truth. Yes. Yeah. So, what's your truth in this moment? What's your truth of this moment? I don't care about the addiction or anything. Like, what's your truth in this moment? Um, I am um I'm enjoying this conversation. It's a challenging conversation but it's uh very um invigorating. Yeah. So even in that that was beautiful because you actually allowed the truth out for a minute and then there was like then the control like you started with the control it came out then a little bit more control like this is this is the game of telling your truth. It doesn't happen in front of a group of people talking about addiction. It happens right now and it's all of you. The truth isn't the words you say. The truth is, are you allowing yourself to feel it all in the in the words you're saying? So, what's your truth in this moment? Allowing yourself to feel all of it. Yeah. There. Yeah. I feel um like very uh like sweaty, like hot. Yeah. Yeah. That that's common. Just by the way, that's common in your in your in your where you are right now in this conversation. That's a very common thing. When this work starts happening, there's a lot of heat comes out. Yeah. Do you mean by that that it's a phase that No, it means like whenever you're like confronting a part of yourself that is looking to like slo off or get healed, whatever the words are you want to use. And in this kind of way, there's a lot of heat that happens when I'm working with people one-on-one. I'll see them sweat. I'll see them like it's part of the part of the process. Interesting. Yeah, I've experienced that before. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so what's your truth in this moment? Every time I ask it's getting here you are. No, no, you're not the despondent teenager. You're this. Um my my truth is gratitude. I'm really grateful for um this experience and other things that I've that I've learned. Awesome. And so the other thing that I'm learning here in you is like when you're when you're in the the when I say what's your truth in this moment, something opens up. But then when you start talking, there's some sort of like control self-consciousness that occurs. What makes it different when you're talking than when you're just what's What's your truth in this moment? What makes it different when you start talking? I don't I don't know. Let's let's let's do the experiment again. It's it's it's changing just by you being aware of it. So, what's your truth right now in this moment? Um, I'm confused. I'm recognizing something about the movement from being embodied. Yeah. Using nonverbal as aation to verbal that there's some juncture. So, go non-verbal for a minute and let the nonverbal talk. I know that's weird to say, but like I'm going to say, what's your truth right now in this moment? And don't even think that you have to say anything. So, what's your truth in this moment? so much power you are holding back. Holy You must have been just like this willful, powerful little girl. Holy I can't imagine you. Did you play some sort of sport? No. I should have. Oh my god. You should have. Oh my god. You just did it, by the way. You just spoke from that place. All you said was, "I should have." But it was all there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a lot of energy. It's a lot of energy. Yeah. It feels really good when you let that that flow. Mhm. And every time you don't, it is self harm. Yeah. So that's the trick is that as you go through the next like days, weeks, don't worry about it in front of a camera. Don't worry about it in a group. Worry about it in the moment. The moment with your mom or your dad or the moment with me or your friend at the what is it to speak your truth in this moment? So you're not doing the self harm and all it requires is the same thing I'm doing which is just asking like what's your truth in this moment? Yeah. Something just clicked. Yeah. What clicked? The situations where I was um telling my story and it being uncomfortable. My truth was that I didn't want to be telling my story. Yeah, there you go. There you go. It's like, oh, I'm supposed to be whatever vulnerable or whatever the Right. Right. Fascinating. What a teaching. Right. I don't want to be telling my story right now. Yeah. And my story is that I am listening to myself not and I'm saying I don't want to tell the story. And that is actually the story. Holy Yeah. Thank you. Pleasure.

You go into a meeting, you're oh, there's the person who hadn't said anything and somehow or another they're like right there at the table, but nobody can even remember they were in the meeting. It's like this amazing magic trick almost, right? There is a fear that is if I get seen, I'm going to be seen as inherently bad. All of the fear of being seen is a belief that there's something inherently wrong with you. If they see me, they will find out that I am broken, right? And so one of the ways to work on it is to actually open your heart to yourself and say, "What is it that I need?" Because that flies exactly in the face of me worried about what you think. We've been getting a lot of questions from people about the fear of being seen. Why they want it so much, but they're also so scared of it. And right when they're about to be seen, about to be known, they they turn away and run from it. So, let's do an episode where we dive into that and then talk about what people can do about it. >> Great. Perfect. Yeah. >> Awesome. So, let's just start with like what is this? There's there's a lot of different ways that this can show up for folks. >> Yeah. So, the fear of being seen, it can be split into two categories. There's the category that people who are just like acute in this feel, which is, oh, I am scared. I have social anxiety. I can figure out how to be completely like invisible. You go into a meeting, you're oh, there's the person who hadn't said anything and somehow or another they're like right there at the table, but nobody can even remember they were in the meeting. It's like this amazing this magic trick almost, right? For those folks, it's very much about like, oh, this isn't safe and so my job is to avoid. And so there's often times there's a strong avoidance pattern. And often times what happened was somebody in their childhood taught them that like to be seen was going to be not good. One of my clients who had this a lot, he doesn't have it anymore luckily, but had had this a lot. He lived in a Eastern European country and it was before the wall came down and his parents were like tall poppy no good. Particularly his mom, his dad had gone. So his mom and so his mom was constantly don't be seen, don't be seen, don't play the music, don't be too macho, you're going to get cut down, you're going to be taken out. And so he was at once dominated by somebody who was some somebody's fear and he was told like do not be big. And so >> and that might have been true in that culture. >> Absolutely. Absolutely. And so he like I remember he disappeared from the first time he did Ground Breakers. Just just was wasn't even in the room. Um and so that's >> not physically he was physically in the room. >> He was physically in the room but nobody could remember him. No like he it was literally as if he was doing a magician's trick of of being unseen while being seen. It was amazing to watch him. And we've now seen that pattern lots of times. The other form of not being seen is something that we all have. I don't think anybody has ever showed up at a rapid fire coaching and been completely not nervous, right? And so the there's a core way in which we all are scared of being seen and that's some shame, some way that we're scared that we're actually not good. We're not inherently good, that we're inherently broken in some way. And so to be fully seen in that is is a whole another thing that just kind of hits all people on some level. And so both of them are are ways of it that happen. One is this very acute thing and one is something that happens for everybody. >> How does this often play out to the point in someone's life where they start to experience that this is holding them back and what what typically happens at that inflection point? >> Yeah. Yeah. It's an interesting thing. I think on some level depending on how hardcore it is, right? So if somebody's got deep social anxiety, they immediately know this is holding me back. There's this fear in that somehow or another they want to be liked. Like there's this desire, oh, I want to be liked and there is a fear that is if I get seen I'm going to be seen as inherently bad. >> So there's there's two different and so they have kind of two choices at that point. I'm going to just seclude myself in which they become more and more and more lonely or I'm going to go out into the world and interact in the world and maybe I get more lonely depending on how real I am or I just stay really quiet in a crowd and then I feel even more lonely cuz people don't see me and so the loneliness builds and this idea that something is wrong with me builds over time and they're not even able to see how people actually see them. Right? So, I've seen people who have like either the social anxiety or scared to say the thing in the meeting and everybody thinks they're really really smart and they really want the feedback, but they can't actually see it. >> Yeah. >> And so, career-wise, this totally stifles people. It's going to limit you in like any kind of executive or leadership role. And so, they start to see that. They start to recognize that that's what's going on. Um and then for most of us like for the for the folks who are scared of being seen in the existential way which is you know most everybody what they start doing what what starts happening is they just feel unsatisfied like the this sense of connection in their life they know it can be stronger and it's just never particularly there >> and it doesn't really go there until they start really seeing themselves. To some degree, all of the fear of being seen is a belief that there's something inherently wrong with you and if and you or somebody else is going to find it out. >> How does this show up in say romantic relationships and in family? We've talked a lot about going out into the world >> and you know in work meetings, but what about what about in love relationships? >> Devastating. like it's it's super devastating because basically what it means is I'm not going to tell you what I need and what I want and who I am. And so if it there and what's interesting is some people they can be in this very safe environment and they can share that and and then some some people can't even share it in that environment. Some people can go out into work and be like this is what I think blah blah blah blah but when they come home they can't share what's really there. They can't share whether it's like that kinky sexual thing that they want or they can't share the fact that they really want to be rich or they can't share the fact that they really think your mom sucks and I don't want to be with her. They can't share all the like little things that happen in life and so they start walking on eggshells and start being different people. And so it just starts to erode any relationship because eventually you're going to get resentful over the fact that the person across from you isn't actually considering you or understanding you because we can't read each other's minds. >> Right. Right. So they can't possibly consider you if you're not showing yourself. So then you start to collect evidence over time that you're not being considered >> and that you're bad. >> Yeah. That's the golden algorithm which we go into you know obviously in other podcasts and stuff which is oh the more that I am scared to be seen the more evidence that I can collect that shows that oh if somebody sees me there's going to be a problem. >> Yeah >> right because I show up incredibly scared. People are not people are not as receptive to fear as as confidence. you know that that I'm hesitant in the way that I talk about something. I'm viewing other people's responses that might just be curious and full of wonder as they don't believe me. They're they're challenging me and see I I said something that was bad. And so that's so it's one of those things that it does accumulate on itself because the emotion that we are scared to have we are avoiding the exact way that we are actually inviting it in. So I'm scared to be seen and therefore like when people see me they see this scared thing and I don't get the love that I want. See I've proven that I'm no good. >> Yeah. So, we've talked about this belief, the the belief that I'm I'm unworthy, I'm bad, I'm wrong, I'm unlovable. >> Yeah. >> So, how does this show up on the different levels like the head, the heart, the gut? Like, cuz a lot of times when somebody freezes, they intellectually know I'm not bad. I have something valuable to share right now. What is making my entire body seize up? Why is my throat clenching? Why? That's a great question. >> Why am I sweating? Why did that entire meeting happen without me even recognizing what was occurring? Yeah, it's an interesting one because that's exactly what you see when you're >> when rapid coaching is happening. People are like and they know Yeah. but their head knows on some level that they they've raised their hand. They want this thing and then when the spotlight's on them, they're like >> each one of these things, whether it's the head or the the human side, the emotional side or the mamleian side or the nervous system side, each one of these things can be on or off. But if they're on the head is basically saying, "These people don't like me. They they if they see me, they're going to think that I'm bad. I'm bad." That's what the head is doing. And it's constantly self-correcting. You said that wrong. You should have said it this way. Why didn't you say it that way? >> Like all that stuff. >> I can solve this by intellectually figuring out the way to be to get my needs met and love it. Yeah. >> As if like people need you to be perfect to to like you, you know? And so that's what the the head is doing. If the head isn't doing that and it's just happening in the in the emotional center and the nervous system, then the head is like, why am I why don't just just speak? Why aren't you just speaking? You know, which is which is the criticism of of the parent or the teacher or whatever saying just do the thing. So it's like you've actually turned the eye of Siren on yourself, >> right? >> Like what? Like and so you're under attack. >> Yeah. >> Right. And so, and the more you're under attack, why aren't you doing this thing? Why why isn't this going right? The more the the rest of your system starts freezing up >> and it ultimately can become a panic attack, a full-blown literal panic attack. >> Well, right. So, it's amazing when you think about it. It's like to some degree there's that external eye of Siren like, okay, the the world is now paying attention to me. Somebody's going to criticize me. And the truth is like there's no time you're going to be in public where somebody's not having a judgmental thought about you. Whether you're confident or non-confident, whether you're scared or not scared, whether you have social anxiety or don't have social anxiety, we're all facing that same reality. And and then there's the internal siren. And when that clicks on then that can really rev up the emotional or the nervous system side of it. So the emotional side of it is typically fear, some version of fear and shame combined. And so there's fear of the being seen, but there's also the shame of like if they see me, they will find out that I am broken, right? And so the I'm broken and the fear together is pretty much what's going on in those moments. Then the nervous system side is just like fight, flight, or freeze. That's what's happening. Often times folks when they when they are being seen in a meeting or something like that, they'll just >> they'll just freeze, right? >> Or some of them will please, oh, I'm going to I'm going to I'll say the thing that makes everybody happy and then and then they're like, okay, great. >> Yeah, just blend in. >> Blend in. And so it's one of those two things is going to happen on the nervous system level. And so >> and it's going to be very activated. They're going to feel hot. they're going to feel, you know, like a lot of charge in the system from the from the nervous system. >> Yeah. Okay. So, you you've got you've got all these layers of a stack here. You've got the the thoughts, the emotions, the the nervous system, and sometimes they're just >> fighting each other like intellectually somebody knows I have something valuable to share here. I showed up to this coaching session because I want to see through my patterns. >> Yes. >> And the nervous systems locked up, right? >> Maybe even vice versa sometimes. So, I I'd love to talk about now where where can somebody start working on this first? What's of all these different ways that this shows up? What's a what's a good entry point for somebody to start investigating to change the pattern? >> Yeah. So, like I I'll tell you a story. I had dinner the other night with this husband and wife team. They're like really super powerful, doing great stuff in the world. And the wife, every time she saw that I saw her, she would, you know, now she is like amazing on all fronts. She's a beautiful person. She's a beautiful woman, physically beautiful. She's done crazy cool stuff in the world, achieved stuff that most people would dream about achieving. And as a mom and loving and sweet, like just like wow, right? And every time I saw her, she would look up, look down, like and it's one point in the meeting, her husband got up, went to the bathroom, and I started talking to her about and she was basically saying some some version of like, "My kids, I'm worried about my kids not getting their needs met. I'm not worried about me >> not getting my needs met." I'm like, "Oh." And she's like, "Yeah, basically my needs are met." And I just went through like really emotional being needs being met. No seen. And she just like shut down. >> Her husband came back and he's like, "Well, did you open up more? Like what did you say now that I was gone?" She goes, "No, no, no. I just shut down even more." >> And then they laughed about it. She said it. And then, yeah, it was great. It was self-aware, too. Right. Amazing woman. And then and then and then they both laugh together. But that's like the quintessential thing of like, okay, well, what is it that makes her like this amazing person, but not being able to admit her own needs is very much exactly the same thing as being seen and what made her scared, which is this shame of like, oh, it's not okay for me to have needs or the needs that I have aren't okay or who I am generally isn't okay. And so I'm going to just evacuate all of my own things that I need that I that I want because they must be bad. >> And so those two things are part and parcel of the of the pattern. And so if you're if you're working on the pattern, there's lots and lots of ways to work on it. Um, but one of the ways to work on it is to actually open your heart to yourself and say, "What is it that I need?" Because that flies exactly in the face of somebody me worried about what you think >> you worried about what you're you're right because I'm now worried. I'm all about you. I'm worried about you. >> Which is another way of trying to take care of your needs. So if if my needs in if my needs directly aren't safe, aren't welcome, aren't >> good, then if I take care of yours, then by proxy my needs might get taken care of, >> right? Except for it never works, >> right? >> Or eventually it doesn't work. Which is why >> just going, oh, what do I need? Can totally start changing this pattern at a core level. So that's one of the ways that you can really work on how do you you know how do you change that core un how do you change that basic fear of being seen? >> Yeah. >> So that's one. The other one is to actually deeply see yourself, right? Like what's actually true, >> right? How how does how does somebody do that? >> Well, the dilemma is that most of us have like soul dysmorphia, right? like like we see ourselves differently just the way that an anorexic person looks in the mirror and sees themselves as fat. Most of us sees our see ourselves like not very clearly. And so if you want to have a clean lens of seeing yourself, connection course view is like one of the best ways because if you're vulnerable with yourself, if you're impartial with yourself, if you have empathy with yourself, if you have wonder about yourself, that's where you start to see yourself more clearly. And that ties together with the recognizing your own needs because you're not going to be seeing yourself if you're just seeing everyone around you, reading their minds, trying to fix them, trying to get everything okay for them in order to be safe. >> Yeah. Exactly. And so the weird part is like the vulnerable with yourself. That's the like that's the tricky part here because what most people think are is going to be vulnerable is like okay vulnerably I and I had a client that did exactly this. I was like they had this fear of being seen. I'm like like let's be vulnerable with yourself. He's like, "The vulnerable thing is that everybody doesn't like me." You know what I mean? And I'm like, >> that's still about everybody else. It's still the dysmorphia. It's the same pattern. >> And it's also you're not being vulnerable because you've told yourself that story a hundred times. >> So, what's the actual story that actually makes you like go uh like what is that? And like can you see someplace where somebody actually really liked you and you couldn't acknowledge it or let it in >> that and he immediately he felt how much more vulnerable that was than to say people don't like me that wasn't vulnerable at all >> and so so the only thing I'd say the impartiality the empathy and the wonder that all clicks with this pattern the vulnerability with yourself in this particular pattern doesn't mean I'm admitting that I'm bad. >> Yeah. >> It means I'm admitting a truth about myself that I don't want to see. >> Right. And so that's that's like part of like switching that around. >> Yeah. So I mean that example brings up a really interesting nuance which is that if you if you say, "Okay, I want to be vulnerable with myself. I'm going to look at myself and see myself clearly." The first thing that's likely to happen is you're going to see yourself exactly the way you've been seeing yourself already. >> Correct? and you're gonna hide from yourself exactly the things you've been hiding from yourself already. >> Yeah. >> So there's it seems like in that case in that coaching moment. >> Yeah. >> Something very specific that happened was actually directing the person's attention to counter evidence for what they actually currently thought. So if you're if you're going internally and you're like what's what's vulnerable with myself right now? Nobody likes me. Okay. If I just assume that that is actually the story I've been telling myself already and I haven't seen anything new, >> how do I completely invert what I think I'm seeing? >> Yeah. >> And look for the truth in the other side of it. >> Yeah. So the nervous system is what's going to tell you that or the like the pucker is what's going to tell you that quicker, right? So intellectually you can do it by just saying, "Okay, let's look at counter evidence and what's the counter evidence I don't want to admit to?" >> Yeah. >> Like that's the easy question intellectually, >> right? And that can surface the pucker like oh wait I have actually been seen and loved before and then the pucker shows up. >> Yeah. Exactly. And like right and then you're when when you feel that pucker then you know you're actually in that vulnerable place rather than in the place that you're normally telling yourself or normally beating yourself up with. So that's another one. The other thing that you can do if you're scared of being seen is to open your heart to the other person. Because what you've done is you've stopped love and connection from flowing between you and the other person. You're worried about what they're going to think, which means you've disconnected. >> Yeah. You've objectified them in a way. There there's a way that they are now an object in your game of self-regulating and feeling safe. Al >> Also, you're rejecting them. >> Yeah. >> Like there's a way in which you're going to hurt me. Basically, what you're going to what you're saying is you are going to hurt me, which is a form of rejection. >> Yeah. And so you've already dismissed them. And so a counteraction is to actually open your heart to them and say, "Oh, how like how open and loving can I be to this person?" No matter what they think or feel about me, that doesn't mean that I'm not going to draw boundaries. It doesn't mean I'm going to take abuse. It doesn't mean that I'm going to be like a punching bag for somebody, but it does mean, oh, right, I'm going to actually stay connected with you. So it what's amazing is that if I choose to be connected with you, it doesn't really matter if you're connected to me for my experience, right? If I'm connected to you and you can like anybody who's listening to this right now can just do it. You can just say, "Okay, like deeply connect with Brett. Brett is like not connecting with you right now. Brett's connecting with me, but like connect with Brett and notice how much less you give a what Brett thinks. about you because there's and how much that connection doesn't really require Brett. So that's the amazing thing is like oh I can open my heart I can connect with somebody and that dissipates my concern with what they think about me which is like mindbogling >> and like it just so reverse of the way that you think things >> and it as it dissipates the concern for what they think about you it increases the wonder for what they're experiencing which might be thoughts about you >> right >> but the wonder replacing the concern is an interesting shift and opens up the nervous system opens the sense of safety and the receptivity >> to new data, new information. >> Yeah. And then wonder is another great one. So, let's just say somebody is you you're showing up, somebody sees you, you're like, this is going horribly wrong. >> Mhm. >> Like use wonder. Oh, what are you seeing right now that's that that's got you upset? Or how upset are you at me right now? How are you how are you feeling about this relationship? There's like a thousand questions that will teach you that a lot of what you think is just not true at all about the other person. >> What if the other person has been running the same pattern? And so you ask them those questions and then they finally have the opportunity to dismiss you and do all the stuff that you've been doing. >> Yeah. Great. >> And so you take that personally. You're like, I knew it. I knew it. They don't like me. >> Yeah. So let let's just assume that for a second. Let's assume that you are not being liked by somebody. Well, the first question is it you that showed up or is this frozen scared like >> Right. So, I'm bad cuz I get frozen and scared. That's just me and people don't like the frozen and scared and I don't know how to change it. What do I do? >> Right. Exactly. So, so the first question is like is that you? That's the first question you have to ask yourself. Is that frozen scared thing you? Like what's you? What do you have to do to show up to be you? And the second question that's really good to ask yourself, are you happy with you? Is this how you want to be? One of the things that I notice is that when somebody's being the way that they want to be, they care a lot less about what other people think, >> right? Because they're not in their own shame. This is actually I'm really proud of this. So often times if someone's like preparing for a meeting or preparing for like the first date, they're thinking about what the other person's going to think about them and they're trying to manage that situation. But if they go in and say, "What's the way that I can behave that will make me super proud no matter what happens, everything starts changing, >> right?" >> Yeah. So >> because you're loving yourself, you're opening your heart to yourself. And the opening the heart works whether towards the other person or towards yourself. >> You're also moving from a orientation to outcomes and more towards an orientation to something that's a more direct feedback in yourself in the moment of how do I want to be right? >> Am I the way I want to be right now? Am I showing up how I want to show up? And then everything else that happens, I don't need to be tracking, predicting, futuring, taking personally. All those things get to fall away if my direct feedback for my behavior is if I'm showing up in a way that feels great to me. >> Right. Which is another version of what is it that I need? >> Yeah. >> Right. It's another version of that which is oh if I'm going to be proud of myself in this moment, how do I want to behave? And but so so none of these things are going to work absolutely except for if you have the access to be able to open your heart. That one's like a very quick absolute thing. So what happens for other folks is they're like, I want to behave this way, but then they get in there and they're in that nervous system fight or flight or freeze because oh my gosh, I'm, you know, like this it's like this deep trauma of it. And so there's another way of working with it which is just exposure. M >> so you see this happen a lot when people do our work all of our courses there's a lot of being seen and as they are seen they become more and more comfortable with themselves >> I mean it's this amazing thing so you know how many people have we seen go through the connection course and they get deeply seen by five different people over the series of the course and then they're they're just like so much more comfortable in who they are and so it's the same thing that you see in like 12step programs or group therapy where the more I speak about the thing and I'm seen in it, the less I care what people think, you know? So, I remember there was a time when I was in my 20s and I'm like, "My dad's an alcoholic and everybody's going to judge me." Now, I'm like, "Yeah, my dad's an alcoholic." I'll say it on like public everywhere. It doesn't like, "Yeah, my dad was an alcoholic." I don't see that at because I have no shame around it anymore. >> Yeah. And the places that I am I'm not where I'm scared to be seen are the places where I have the shame and which gives tells me this is the place where I have the freedom and shame. One of the best ways to to just address the shame is to share it with people and notice, oh, they're not ashamed. They don't think there's something broken with me. Or to notice, wow, we all have that. Like every like everybody has a parent, not everybody. Most people have a parent that was addicted to something somehow, emotion, television, something like most people have shame, most people have fear, most people like these are all human experiences. >> Yeah. Yeah. So, it's interesting. It's like both of the ways out are either recognizing I'm not alone in thinking this or I was alone in thinking this. Like this was only a thought in my own head like I'm the only one I invented this. Exactly. >> It's kind of funny how that's like both of those seem to be a way out. >> Both. Yeah. And and and and the exposure just oh I am going to little ways be seen every day. >> Yeah. And the thing that that does is that most of the people who who feel or are scared of being seen but want to be seen, another experience that they have a lot of is that they're lonely. And so this stops the loneliness. So like recently I was talking to my daughter and she was just noticing like she's got friends in college and everything like that and she's she's like, "Oh, I'm starting to feel lonely." And my question to her was like, "What are the ways that you're not being yourself? What are the ways that you're not showing up asking for what you want, saying what's wrong, having the hard conversations? Because if you aren't doing that, you're not actually with anybody. You're all you're by yourself in this reality. And so, literally, I think it was like 3 days later, cuz you know, Esme is amazing. She she called me up and she was like, "I've had three hard conversations in two days. I feel so much better. I've like had these like I just looked everywhere that I wasn't saying the thing or being the person that I wanted to be and I just did it and I feel so much better and it's and it happens just like that. It's amazing how quickly loneliness can be cured if you actually show up in a way that you're proud of saying the things that are important to you. >> Yeah. And I also want to talk about another aspect of the shame and in this pattern which is often people will show up with I I really want to be seen. I should be seen. I should be doing a thing. I should go have the hard conversations. And so that exact uh set of behaviors you just described could be somebody something that somebody tries to force themselves into or beat themselves up into as a part of this pattern. What would you say to to that to somebody who's like >> I should really show up more. I should really be seen. I should really be vulnerable. >> What I would say is I would point back to the beginning which is what do you need to take care of yourself? What what do you need to open to your heart to yourself and to other people? Because that framing prevents it from being I should do this, I should do that. I should do this other thing >> because there's a like a self-care, there's a love, there's an expansion in that feeling. There's an opening up to yourself and to the other person. >> Yeah. >> And so that can't coexist with you should do this. What's wrong with you? D. >> Yeah. Your question is a great pointer because it is emotionally going from what what what to oh I can actually just love this moment you myself and that's really what's changing on the emotional level is you're going from a contraction to an openness whether it's through wonder or whether it's through love or whether it's through admitting and owning your needs or what would I be proud out of there. All these things are emotionally opening you up to the experience of what's going on. >> And when you are closed down and contracted emotionally, you're not actually experiencing reality. >> Yeah. >> You're experiencing your thought of what reality is. >> But what about also the need for safety? If if my if I see myself as bad or wrong for hiding, for all the hiding I've done in my life, what about acknowledging the need to feel comfort, the need to feel safe, that that pattern provided for me even while it limited me in many ways. >> Awesome. Yeah, I think that's a great thing to do. >> Yeah. >> Right. That's another version of loving yourself. That's another version of like honoring who you are. >> So addressing this pattern isn't about, oh, I've been doing it wrong all this time. I've been hiding and I should be getting out there and getting seen. >> Correct. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Correct. Yeah. Yeah. Like if you beat yourself up then you are like we talked about this earlier in the episode. If you're beating yourself up then you are now the eye of siren turned on yourself. >> Yeah. >> So any way in which you are like putting that same criticism on yourself to undo that is going to be incredibly useful for this pattern. Right? Because that self-criticism is the shame, right? And so any way that you can really look at that shame and there's lots of ways to look at the shame and and start to unwind it, one is with people that we talked about, but another way to really look at that shame and unwind the shame is to just ask yourself, would you criticize somebody else for it? And that for some people that's going to get rid of like 80% of it. Oh, so somebody else was like scared as a kid and they learned to hide. Do you think >> especially if it's somebody they care a lot about? >> Exactly. Did you are they an Are they bad? >> Do they need to be fixed? Right. And so that's another way to just really quickly say, "Oh, wait. If it wasn't me, would I treat myself this way?" >> Yeah. So, I want to leave people with one like specific concrete thing that they can do. Yeah. next time they show up to say a meeting or a tense conversation with their partner and they're freezing up, they're hiding, they recognize this patterns alive, this podcast is ringing in their head >> and that little tiny part of the lyic system that's still active. >> Yeah. >> Is like, what do I do? What what's a thing? >> Open your heart to that person. >> Mhm. >> So, stop objectifying them. Recognize that you've already cut yourself off from them. You're judging them. You're basically saying in that moment, you're going to attack me. You're a bad person. You only care about yourself. You can't see me. And you're totally self-obsessed and focused on you. That's what you're saying about the other person. So, you've already like fully disconnected and and you're worried about what they're thinking about you, but you're basically thinking all those things about them. you're like and you right like and that's the hard thing for people to like really just grock is like oh if I'm scared about what you're going to say about me I have judged you I have I have categorized you I've boxed you I I've made you into an enemy >> like which is everything you're scared that they're going to do to you've already done to them and look they don't seem to give a >> yeah which I I and I think that's where like A lot of the fear when people come to a coaching session about this comes from is, oh, if I actually see how I've been treating myself and I see the way that I've been treating others, then I have to feel a ton of grief. >> That's right. >> And possibly in front of these 300 people on this call. >> Right. Yep. >> But in front of myself. >> Yeah. >> Especially. >> Exactly. Because that's what shame's job is is to is to stagnate an emotional experience, right? And so when that shame relieves, there's going to be grief and other emotions that need to be felt that are are going to be scary. >> Yeah. Like you might find yourself on a podcast and be like, I'm Joe Hudson and I just realized that I've been pronouncing I have Sauron wrong this entire episode. >> I knew I was doing that. What is is it Sauron or Siren? S I've still got it wrong. Siren. I'm going to call it Siren. What? >> Yeah, Siren. Go for it. >> Sauron. Yeah, exactly. It's horrible. Everybody's gonna judge me. >> Everybody who judges Joe for that, please. They're already commenting. It's already been there. >> It's been happening. >> What a pleasure. Pleasure to be with you. >> Yeah, you too, Joe.

Summary

All of us came into this world completely helpless. In many ways, we remain so throughout our entire lives. How does the emotion of helplessness serve us, and what happens when we embrace it?
Transcript

Episode Intro: Welcome back to the Art of Accomplishment where we explore how deepening connection with ourselves and others leads to creating the life we want with enjoyment and ease. I am Brett Kistler and I am here again with Joe Hudson.

Joe: Hey, Brett. Good to see you again.

Brett: Today I wanted to start with a story. About 10 to 15 years ago, in the height of my base jumping career, I taught my romantic partner at the time, my life partner, to jump off cliffs with a parachute.

Joe: That's a non loaded situation right there.

Brett: Very non loaded, we could say, and also she was the first person I ever taught to base jump. I had done some coaching in skydiving, and I had informally mentored people but I had never been with somebody from step one, how to start, how to pack, the body position, and everything. I did that within the context of a relationship and all of the stuff that happens within a romantic relationship.

Joe: Don't tell me what to do. It is your parachute. Don't tell me what to do.

Brett: Let me do everything for you. No, no. It was honestly a really wonderful experience for both of us to have had, and also there was a lot of stuff that we moved through in it. The thing that characterized the experience most, which is what we are going to talk about in this episode, was helplessness. That feeling the first time watching her make that first jump. BASE jumping is an acronym, building, antenna, span like bridges, and earth cliffs. She did her first four jumps from each of those different jumps, which is not something people normally do. Normally people train from a bridge for a long time before moving to something more dangerous like a cliff. For each of these first four jumps in four different countries, we were both very puckered. For me, there was this deep feeling and experience of moving with helplessness.

One of the things I learned was the more that I leaned into allowing myself to feel the helplessness, the less I got in her way, and the more she was able to take ownership of the experience and ultimately the less helpless I ended up feeling as she started to develop her skills and abilities.

Joe: I want to say if you are a mother listening to this, that's a huge key. If you are a father listening to this, that's a huge key, that feeling of allowing helplessness in raising your kids.

Brett: That became a two way thing in our relationship. I had a much higher risk tolerance than she had in jumping, and she moved through a lot of how to love this person across the risk continuum. I can't control what's going to happen in the next 15 seconds. There is nothing I can do about it. There are ways I can show up. Let's just dive into helplessness and talk about that today.

Joe: Okay, sounds great.

04:30 Brett: Let's start by talking about what it is.

Joe: The way I think about it is helplessness is a component of fear. A lot of people will ask me what the difference is between fear and helplessness. I don't think of it that way. I don't know any fear that doesn't have some part of it that feels helpless, and I don't know any helplessness that isn't fear. I think of it as more of an ingredient of fear, and there are some things where we feel it deeply, almost hundred percent helplessness. That would be getting sideswiped by a car, being overpowered physically, situations where there was just this deep feeling of helplessness and some fear. Then there are things like asking yourself if you are going to do a good presentation in front of your managers, which might have fear in it and a little bit of helplessness, like you can't control what they think of you or if they had coffee that morning or if they exercises, but there is a much smaller component inside of that kind of fear. I think of it as a component of fear and I would say the most potent. I would say it is the cayenne pepper of fear.

Brett: As a component of fear, how would you describe it? What is that particular flavor of fear?

Joe: It is the absence of control. It may not be true that you have no control over the situation, but the feeling is you have no control over the situation. It is an experience of there being nothing you can do to change the outcome, and it is an outcome I really don't want. It is that combination.

Brett: We have got it as an ingredient of fear. What is it not? What ways people might describe helplessness that we are not referring to here?

Joe: I would say some folks would say they feel helpless when they feel stuck, and you may feel helpless and stuck but you might also feel angry and stuck or just a different flavor of fear and stuck. Helplessness is not a feeling of being stuck. Oftentimes, that feeling of helplessness is very alive and potent, like cayenne pepper. If you eat cayenne pepper, you don't feel stuck. You feel movement. I would say it can happen where an overwhelming feeling can make you freeze and there is some feeling of being stuck to that. I would say it is not that.

I would also say it is not learned helplessness, meaning a limiting belief or thinking you can't change something. The interesting thing about helplessness is the more you allow the feeling, the more potent, more virile and the more empowered you actually become in your emotional world. It is that feeling of not being able to do anything about it. I feel like it is not stuck, learned helplessness, being a victim or anything of that stuff.

Brett: Honing in on this, we are talking about the feeling of helplessness, not the story that I am helpless or learned helplessness as the defense mechanism or collapse, recognition, or detachment, feeling like there is nothing you can do.

Joe: None of that.

Brett: The visceral feeling, the cayenne pepper.

Joe: I would say when that kind of fear comes through and it is at its most potent, it is one of the things we do not feel the most, especially for people who are super high capacity or people who become very self reliant and who are big change agents on the planet. That feeling is one of the scariest feelings. They will do everything not to feel it. I will try again. I will be resilient because I do not want to feel that feeling again. I don't want to have that experience again. I am going to be self reliant. I am going to work it out, figure it out and do the thing. For them, it is often the thing they want to feel the least and it is the thing they can't recognize they feel the least. They have a hard time recognizing that emotional experience. For self-reliant people in particular, allowing themselves to feel that level of helplessness is one of the most potent change agents, much like if someone is feeling stuck a lot or depressed, anger can be one of the most potent change agents for them. For someone who is super self reliant, leaning into helplessness can be one of the most potent change agents for them.

Brett: It is really fascinating here because it is the first thing that we feel. We come out of the womb and the first thing that we are is helpless. I don't remember my moment of birth, so I can't speak from episodic memory but I just imagine helplessness is pretty much a beautiful description of our very first moments. It is fascinating that we can find ourselves feeling estranged from that feeling when it really is at the core of our entire life, being small in a big universe.

Joe: We have no idea when the bus will hit us, if the bus will hit us. There are so many ways you can look at your reality and recognize your own helplessness. There are some things that are really fascinating about it as well, which is that it is a close cousin to surrender. Helplessness is the recognition that you are not in control and wanting to be in control. Surrender is the recognition you are not in control and being good with it, which is a state that creates a tremendous amount of relief. It is a really interesting thing that they are really close cousins. Both of them have the aliveness of not being able to control the situation entirely. One is just a severe rejection of that experience, and one is an acceptance of that experience.

11:00 Brett: I love that because the next question I was going to ask after we started defining it was about what helplessness does as it moves through. What happens when we feel it all the way through? One thing you just described there was this connection to surrender. Often people talk about surrender, and I guess that can be conceived of as an end state but helplessness is actually the gateway.

Joe: That's right. I wouldn't describe surrender as an end state. It is more of a verb really.

Brett: It is often described that way. It is often described as a verb too, and what is it that you are doing when you surrender? What are you welcoming?

Joe: What are you not doing when you surrender? My experience is that when folks fully feel through their helplessness, when I first fully felt through mine and when I have seen really high powered executives feel through their helplessness, they become a lot more capable and serene in their capacity. A great step of this is 12 step programs. They have the serenity prayer, which is all about knowing what you can control and not control and having the courage to affect the things you can control and having the peace not to attempt to control the things you can't control. If you think about the kind of thing they do for addiction, one of them is to understand that you don't have any control over the substance, admitting that you are helpless in the face of the substance or if you are in al anon, the alcohol. You are helpless in that. Somehow or another, weirdly as it sounds, it is saying I am helpless to this, which allows you to not be an addict, to not be controlled by it. It is the same thing. As you allow that feeling of helplessness, it allows you to see and experience the fact that you have control but it is not quite control anymore. I don't think we have a word for it in the human language. It is not like you surrender and say you don't have any power over alcohol and therefore now I can have control over alcohol. It is not having any power over alcohol and you keep on admitting that to yourself and in exchange you are far less likely to drink. There is no word for what you get because you don't particularly get control at the end of it, but you see options and choice.

Brett: Agency.

Joe: You have agency. That's right. You see the options and choice, but it doesn't mean you have control.

Brett: I am curious to go into this a little bit from the head, heart, gut perspective as well and how helplessness shows up in each of these.

Joe: That's great. Helplessness is the heart is the emotional experience of fuck, there is nothing I can do. We can all close our eyes and go back to an experience of the most helpless we have felt. When we do this in workshops, a lot of people will go into that place where they were physically abused or were sexually molested or got into a car accident or when the whole world was collapsing on them and there was nothing they could do. Interestingly, often a precursor to awakening is this experience as well, which is part of the journey into the identity fading away and seeing the truth of who we are is the recognition that you have no control and that you are absolutely helpless to the identity and to the identity falling apart. You can't actually protect it. Again, it doesn't give you control over the identity, but it somehow allows you to have agency with the identity. The heart is that emotional experience.

The head is literally there is nothing I can do. It is the thought process of there is nothing I can do. It is an extremely heightened state of the nervous system. When you are feeling one hundred percent helpless, it is around life and death. Whether that is egoic death or physical death, that's where you are going to feel it.

Brett: What happens if you speed bump the experience of helplessness and just skip over it or embrace it? If it is such a natural experience and we are born into it, what makes us find distance from it? What makes it not just flow smoothly and naturally?

Joe: It is super uncomfortable, that confrontation. Our egos and our identity don't want to experience its death as it turns out. We just push it away, and what seems to happen is the more that that experience isn't lived with in the minutiae and in the large experiences, what I notice is people are more likely to be controlling, to live with low level anxiety often, to have a low level of experience and to perpetually feel under attack. What I notice is when people constantly lean into the helplessness, they feel more and more agency. There are now hundreds of tales, but I think the most common one is Mandela, who was in a prison, and he dealt with physical abuse, pounding rocks, and being made to feel small. He was in a completely helpless situation. By feeling into that helplessness, he was able to have an open heart, agency and love. He wasn't able to stop being abused or pounding rocks. He didn't have any control over this situation, but he had this deep sense of internal agency that came with it. That's what it does. It is that similar thing of seeing through, just like surrender does, the material world of control and feeling into the sense of agency and empowerment that can't be controlled by the external world. If you don't do it, then you don't have that sense of empowerment and you are constantly chasing power and control. It can all be taken away from you. Nothing could be taken away from Mandela. It had all been taken, and there he was there, still there, and he came out of that situation empowered and not beaten down.

Brett: It sounds like there is an acceptance component in it as well. There is a way that experiencing and feeling your helplessness burns through some of the illusions and fantasies of control that are attached to what you are so that you can find and connect to what's actually here right now. From there, you can develop agency, competence, and a clear vision.

Joe: The only thing I will say there is what the human mind when it hears that, what it wants to do is say now I will accept the fact that I don't have control, which is just a work around not to feel the helplessness. It is the same kind of thing as if somebody was going to say I am going to surrender now. Surrender is something that's constantly happening. It is more of an acknowledgement than a doing, and the doing is the opposite of it. For instance, the reality is we are all surrendered to our brains having thoughts. We are not controlling the next thought we are going to have. There are just thoughts coming, and some of those thoughts are you are wonderful and some are you are shit. The thoughts come. You are not thinking the next thought I am going to have is this and then the next is this. We are in a state of surrender of that. It is just whether we are recognizing that or whether we are trying to do something about it. If we are trying to do anything, including trying to surrender, then we are not actually surrendered.

It is the same thing with the experience of helplessness. It is allowing the feeling of helplessness that creates the acceptance. It is not becoming accepting that creates the freedom. A lot of people say they are going to accept their helplessness and be all zen about it, but that doesn't actually get you there.

Brett: It is another form of management, another control pattern in the avoidance of the feeling of the helplessness.

Joe: A more subtle one and in many ways a better one than other ones, but yes.

Brett: What are some other ways this might show up for people? We have talked about higher powered exes, teaching someone you love to do something dangerous, parents and addiction.

Joe: I would say the important thing is that there is a little bit of helplessness in every one of our anxieties and fears. There is actually truly something helpless. If we are going into a meeting and we want people to think we are great or think our presentation is great or get agreement, we don't have full control over that. There is a part of that that is helpless. If you go into that helplessness and feel that helplessness, it frees you quicker than any other way of freeing yourself from fear. Again, it is not freeing yourself like it goes away. It frees yourself by going through. If you do it to manage your fear, it won't work. If you do it as a way to fall in love with your fear, it will work. What's interesting to me is other examples are any place where you are anxious, so if you are anxious that your girlfriend won't love you if you say X, Y or Z, it means that there is some part you are helpless about. You cannot control your girlfriend's love for you. You just can't do it. Or you are really scared the car is going to break down. There is some way in which you are completely helpless to whether that car breaks down or not. It is in every one of our fears, and I think knowing that and going into that is incredibly important.

As far as full, hundred percent cayenne pepper helplessness, I remember I had a really deep experience of it when I had given everything I could to this company. I cared so much about it. It was doing so much good in the world, and I had to close the company. That feeling of just oh shit, my whole world collapsing, everything I think I am collapsing. How much freedom and spaciousness I had afterwards surprised me. It was literally two days and I went right into the helplessness. It was a bumpy two days, but within two days, I felt so much freedom and so much more capable of investing, so many lessons learned, whereas if I would have beat myself up asking myself what I did wrong, the lessons would not be half as potent or varied. But I have seen people do this when their whole world collapses, the divorce, the kids leave, the business collapses. They have that deep feeling of helplessness then, too.

23:50 Brett: How do we recognize and work with our helplessness? First of all, notice where we are avoiding it because in many places we have probably avoided it so well that we are not consciously aware that it is there. Once we find it, how do we work with helplessness in such a way that we don't go into any of the backwaters, like the story of the helplessness or the collapse around it or acceptance as a subtle control mechanism?

Joe: Ways to find it are pretty simple. Look for the places where you are most controlling and where you have the controlling thing that you know creates a rigidity and a disruption in your system. That's a great way to find it. Another way to find it is whatever anxiety you have, look for the place that has the most cayenne pepper in it, like somatically feeling where the thing that is most scary is. What's interesting is you don't particularly need to feel it in every situation if you start feeling it in any situation. Then it relaxes in other situations, just like if I move anger, then anger moves more easily with less violence and friction to the system. Similarly, if you move the helplessness in some of the key areas, like going into your memory and asking yourself when you felt most helpless, and you start moving those experiences, then it changes the way that it moves through you and the rest of your life. You don't have to find it in every location. Once you have found it three, four, five, six, seven times and you move it, it starts moving differently in your system. You will recognize it far more easily. That's how to identify it and to start the movement.

The movement is literally to allow your body to have the fear release of shaking and going to worst case scenarios and feeling all of the experiences of that. It is the recognition that you are not in control, and to go into either the scenarios where you lose if it hasn't happened yet or where you have lost, so to speak, or have suffered that loss or trauma in some way. It is really important when you are doing this that you have a lot of support around you. A person who can be with you is really great. A person who can be with you and not be in fear and understands that they are there to be a grounded support is a really useful thing. We would never do a release like that in a group unless there was a very strong container of love and support. I think that's really important to be able to do that. That prevents a lot of the backwaters.

What can happen if someone moves a lot of helplessness but they are alone and they get caught in the past where they felt it and they can't see the reality of today, their nervous system gets overwhelmed and then it can be counter productive for sure.

Brett: Which was going to be my next question, for listeners just hearing this episode and they want to explore working with their helplessness, what is one way you would suggest they can play with that in a way that is not likely to lead them into opening it up too much and getting stuck in it?

Joe: An easy, gentle approach is the emotional inquiry we talked about, I think, in the last episode. We can put a link to that audio. That would be a great way to put your feet in the water and feel it. That is not having a full release of it. It is being deeply inquisitive and full of wonder about the somatic experience of it. It is allowing it to be in your body, but it will make sure that your body doesn't get overwhelmed and dysregulated. That's a good way. The other way is to take five seconds any time you are feeling anxiety and go to the really spicy part of it. Ask yourself what the really scary thing is and go right into that just for five seconds and then go about your day. That's a really good way to start exploring it, somatically go into it.

Brett: That reminds me of the practice people go through and they visualize everything they are afraid of, all of the way through their death and beyond their death. There is a way to do that as the story, visualizing the thing I am afraid of, my company or relationship falling apart, my kids getting on heroin, whatever those might be, but then there is also the underlying feeling. If I visualize it and put myself in that position, what does it feel like? We can also do that backwards through our lives, too, and then do the emotional inquiry with what comes up there.

Joe: The same thing can be found in many traditions, the Roman tradition and the Samurai tradition. They all had this tradition of visualizing your death emotionally in parts. You can visualize any negative thing. I also recommend doing the opposite, too, which is visualizing the whole thing working out perfectly well and having all of those experiences because sometimes those are the scarier things. The ego dies either way. If the worst happens, the ego has to shift. The self identity has to shift. If everything goes incredibly beautifully, the self identity has to shift. Both of them can be really useful.

Brett: That brings up a very important point here which is what the difference between doing this practice and catastrophizing is. Many people do that all of the time. This isn't going to go well. That's going to go to shit.

Joe: One is in the head, and one is in the body. One is a thought process created by an emotional state, and the other one is fully deeply feeling the emotional state all of the way through. Even if you catastrophize, thinking everything could blow up, you will notice in the way I said it, you could hear my whole body tighten, which means I am holding back the emotion. If you can even say everything is going to blow up and you can allow yourself to feel the whole thing, that can be incredibly healing. The catastrophizing, that's dangerous or it creates less freedom and more rigidity. It is the one where you don't feel it.

Brett: That makes it loop. You just keep looping in it. There is a reason why those thoughts are coming up. Your body wants to process this, and so it is going to keep knocking on your door until you actually feel it. If you are just letting yourself have the thought but constricting around the feeling, then it is going to continue. I also like the component of remembering to do this on the flipside, on all of the positive things. There is an emotional yoga here, expanding the range of motion of how much you can be with and experience from the range of helplessness to everything is going great, all of the way in between. Then whatever actually does happen, even in those little moments, let's say you are giving a speech and between each word there is some amount of rigidity, self censoring, and management, and all of that can relax if you feel capable and welcoming of the full range of the experience. You will have that much more freedom.

Joe: I think the key there is the welcoming. I know I have said it once, but it is so important I want to say it again. If you do all of this stuff to control your experience and to control the emotions, it will not work. It has to be welcoming, like you can't wait to feel helpless again. The freedom is not in not feeling helpless again. The freedom is in not being able to wait to feel helpless again.  

32:35 Brett: I would love to also ask about how this works in a team.

Joe: That's a great question. There are so many ways to think about that question. What happens when an entire team feels helpless? What happens when one person in a team feels helpless? What happens in a team where nobody allows their helpless feelings? Those are all different things that occur inside of a team. Typically if there is something that a team is not comfortable with, like they are in denial about something in the business or in their objectives, one person will start feeling more helpless and they will get rejected by the rest of the team.

Brett: One person is holding the helplessness for the team and consolidating it, and the rest are not feeling it.

Joe: Then they reject that person. That person goes away and a new person in the team starts holding it. That's what usually happens with one person. If the entire team feels helpless, and I am assuming they are not fully feeling helpless, and the whole team feels this is never going to work and they are not processing that, divest. Get out because that becomes that learned helplessness, that collapse, and burnout. If I am talking to somebody who is burned out, not the burned out of having worked hard for a long time and needing a break but the burned out of a psychological burnout, it is because they are not in that serenity prayer. They are using anxiety to motivate themselves over time because they feel responsible for dozens of reasons. Typically that's going to lead to some sort of burn out if it is being used as refusing to feel helpless, and therefore, I am going to motivate myself. There is going to be a burn out that's going to occur for those people. It is going to be pretty bad typically and last years. That's another one.

If a team is not scared of the feeling of helplessness, then they feel it and then they pivot. There is a lot more enjoyment and movement in the team. They will confront things easily, happily, even difficult things, because they know that by confronting it and feeling the helplessness, they will move into a truth and a better way to go very quickly. They think it is cool to feel helpless because they know on the other side of that they are going to have a clear vision of how to move forward that's going to work better.

Brett: I imagine that also applies to a family in many of the same ways.

Joe: Yeah. There was this moment I had with Esme recently. Esme was going through something with her boyfriend, and at some point I thought that it was my fault. I told her this was the way I raised her, and because I raised her this way, it is creating this kerfuffle in her relationship. I said I was really sorry for that. In that moment, there was a helplessness that both of us felt. I wish I hadn't done it that way, but I had done it that way. She said it was done and she loved me and there was nothing but this that can be done about it. We just sat there and looked at each other. Then we cried for a bit. She told me she felt really fortunate that we could have that moment together, and that was the end of it. That was the end of the process, and oddly just that in itself relieved the pattern in her. The pattern went away just in that acknowledgement. I remember thinking to myself how when I was younger and parenting her, I was so scared of fucking her up. I thought to myself if I fucked her up one hundred ways and each one led to a moment like this, totally fucking worth it.

Brett: I can imagine the puckering. I don't have a kid, but I can imagine the puckering I would feel if I said I am sorry for raising you this way and now you are wrong. That's how I would be afraid of that coming off. Peace, sorry.

Joe: I wasn't saying she was wrong.

Brett: I can see that being the fear of acknowledging it.

Joe: There was definitely that moment of oops. You are in pain like this because I wasn't fully competent as a parent, and I was scared of X, Y, and Z and so I did A, B and C. I remember that moment where we just looked at each other and we were helpless in it and then the tears. That's a really great way of feeling through that.

Brett: That's a really great way of closing this episode on helplessness.

Joe: Pleasure as always. It is good to be with you. 

Hey everybody, welcome to the art of accomplishment where we explore living the life you want with enjoyment and ease. Today we have a coaching session for you and it's all about money. The money issues that we have on the surface and the root causes underneath. Bobby Hobert joins us today for this coaching session and it is intense. So don't forget to breathe. Joe, one thing that's been on my mind um recently a lot is abundance and really trying to call in financial consistency with my business. I left my job at the top of January to go all in on my coaching business. This has been in the works, I would say, over the last seven, eight years. Graduating college in 2016, going down this self-development path, driving Uber full-time for three and a half years while building the first podcast, then pivoting, working at Liquid IV full-time while continuing to build my podcast, my brand, and uh continuing to challenge myself to grow. And it finally came to a point where it was like it felt now or never. I need to take this step. And I left my career in the top of January with some runway. And this year it has been just as you can as I'm sure you've seen in your career, the clients that you've coached, it's been a roller coaster of emotions. And the timing of us doing this this uh conversation today was is incredible because I really feel like we're kind of in a very tough spot where credit cards are ran up. You know, cash flow is really low. We're looking into maybe having to liquidate stock market stuff to just get by. And I'd love to just explore are there limiting beliefs in mine? Like I feel like there's internal things that are blocking you. I see the value that I bring. I see it in the interactions that I have with people or clients. And I just want to set the frame of just even that's what I'm bringing into today's call. And from there, I'd love to just kind of see where we go or just any anything that you can pull for me or challenge me that may um help edge me and correct me in the right direction. Cool. So, what what makes you call it abundance instead of say I want to be filthy rich? Oh, yeah. Here we go. I think there's I a friend of mine called called me out on this. He's like I think it's me being scared to say that out loud that I'm a bad person if I want to acquire a ton of money. Cool. What makes it what makes you bad for wanting to have money? Uh, what makes me bad for wanting? H, maybe that's even a better question. That's maybe even a better question. I'm almost wondering are there are there beliefs from when I was younger? I grew up in a very um bluecollar household where I just made the association that if you have a lot of money, you've done bad things to make that money or you're all mighty and powerful. Well, let's check the first one that you mentioned or the second one you mentioned. Are you how how how okay is it for you just to want? I think it's totally okay to want. Okay. Say something that you want that you're totally like there's no constriction in your body when you say it. Just I want to make $250,000 a year. Yeah. There is constriction in your body there. You didn't say like like there was no love in your system when you're like, "Oh, I want to make $250,000." It was I want to make $250,000. Like you had to tighten up and speed up to be able to say that. But let let's just let's stay away from money just for a second. I just want to get into like want. What what what is it okay for you to want and what is it not okay for you to want? And I don't mean logically. I get it. Logically, you know, it's all good. But emotionally, nervous systemwise, what is it okay for you to want and what is it not okay for you to want? So, for instance, if you say, "I want my fiance to be happy." Let's hear you say that and see what happens. I want I'm sorry. Your wife. You're not your fiance. No, you're right. You're right. You're right. I want my fiance to feel happy. Yeah. Okay. Now, I want $250,000 a year. What's that one? I want $250,000 a year. Okay. How was How are those two things different? Even me saying it the second time, I'm catching myself trying to be more gentle and calming and loving. So I it's not even fair for me on that second take. But what I noticed is you you were more loving trying to be and it actually tickled you like it I saw the smile. I saw like you got tickled. Where does the tickle? What causes the tickle? Yeah. Well, we'll get there in a second. So the the so so the question is just generally what are you allowed to want and what are you not allowed to want if you had to guess and categorize I would I want to are we talking like emotionally just across the board if you had to say it's okay for me for instance it's okay for me to want good things for other people it's not okay for me to want good things for myself or it's okay for me to want emotional stuff but it's not okay for me to want financial stuff or like if you had to categorize what it's okay for you to want and what it's not okay for you to want, how would you do that? It's okay for me to want to help change the world. It's not okay for me to want this abundance of money or want wealth, extreme wealth. It's okay for me to want to prioritize my own well-being. It's not okay for me to Yeah, it's tricky, right? So, I'm just going to take a shot in the dark or it's not really, but we're going to call it a shot in the dark. So, who was the parent that you had to emotionally take care of when you were like who was the who were who were the people? Maybe it was a kid, but a a younger kid, but somewhere you were taught that your job was to take care of somebody instead of yourself is my guess. Who who or what was that? It's a tough question because I I don't feel I had to necessarily take care of either of my parents. I had a I have a younger sister, two years younger than me, but I I I feel that I looked out for her um growing up and I tried to um like when we were in high school, she I felt like was going down a different path in the sense of the people she was surrounded by I didn't think were um the most encouraging, positive, and I was around more Yeah. This sounds like people. Yeah. that doesn't that doesn't hit when I'm listening to okay um typically and so I may be wrong on this one but typically what I see is that somebody who has this I I fall into the category uh this desire to like help the world save the world help other people a lot of coaches fall into this category generally they had somebody that they were responsible for their happiness when they were young and it was a subtle responsible for happiness like maybe it was uh I need to make sure they're happy so they don't get angry in the house or maybe I need to take care of them emotionally because they're always depressed or there's a way in which what the natural way of parents or some maybe other caregivers is that their job is just to constantly be looking after the kid. But it's usually when there's this like save the world thing, there's the other way that goes, which is their job is to take care of the parents a little bit. And so I see if I if I go one layer deeper to give you more context when I say, you know, I want to change the world. Yeah. What I'm really trying to say now like thinking about it is I want to help people live and create a life that excites them just the same way when I graduated college. That was the mission. 99% went and got a corporate career and I was like I'm going this my own path and everyone was question marking and asking me why. So I think even if I go a layer deeper I want to change the world in the sense of I want to help empower others to step in and create that life that they want for themselves. That's what I'm talking about. So is there any place you can look at your childhood I may be totally off but is there any place you can look in your childhood and go oh I was responsible for the happiness of an adult where it wasn't my job. And I want to just acknowledge this could be a very hard thing to do in a public podcast because oftent times people feel like they're criticizing their parents, which is not what's actually Yeah. You know, I I'll be honest with you, Joe. Even this being recorded, it it's still it's uh I feel extremely comfortable with sharing whatever comes up. I'm just really trying to be mindful and think about is there a moment or am I just completely disregarding it? Yeah, this wouldn't be a moment. This would be like a habit. Yeah. Not like it would be a h it would be something that was consistent. Yeah. I want to say because nothing is coming up that I I don't think that's the case. Yeah. We'll explore. Let me explain in a couple other ways just to be quick about it. How often were you called selfish growing up? Kid. Yeah. Not Not really ever, I don't think. Great. Okay. That then that that probably explains that it's that's not the pattern that's at play here. Okay. So, going back, what is it that makes it bad to want money? What is it that makes it your job to help other people? So, right now you're in your head. Can you bring yourself down into your heart and belly? Like just like bring your whole body online as answering the questions. Yeah. I really don't know what has caused this like this money. I don't need a cause. I just need like a an emotional justification. We don't have to go into history for it. Just like what right now would make it for you. Tense, uncomfortable, non-deserving. Oh, there it is. Yeah. Non-deserving. Cool. What makes you not deserve money? I haven't worked hard enough. I don't have the skill sets for it. The value I bring doesn't equal to the amount of money that I know I should be paid for. Okay, so Elon Musk really probably didn't work much harder than the guy who owns my local tire shop. Like actually can you point to any place in the world where somebody's financial gain is deserved by the or lack of financial gain is deserved by how much effort they put in? No. Okay. What separates Elon from the local guy at the tire shop? Yeah, it's a great question. There's probably several things, but let's not worry about him. Let's be solely focused on you. So the the So what makes it that you have to add value to be deserving and I assume this goes across multiple planes of your life, right? I'm assuming that like getting love from your fiance means that you have to have a certain amount of value taking care of her, you know, whatever. So what what what makes that transaction Again, you're kind of in your head. Let's take you out of the head. Just look at me and say, "Joe, you need to add value for me to love you." Joe, you Joe, you need to add value to love me. No, for for you to love me. Joe, you need to add value to love me. The other way. Joe, you need to add value if you want my love. Oh, I see. Joe, you need to Joe, you need to add value if you want my love. Yeah. How'd that feel? Um, not true. Yeah. So, what makes it true for you? I don't know. I don't know. If you had to guess, if you had to guess, what makes it that you have to add value, you have to get effort to get good things in the world. I keep trying to come back to you and not get so in my head. Yeah. So, imagine you you you have a kid, your fiance, and you get married, you have a kid, the kid pops out, you look at the kid, and you're like, "Not going to love you till you add some value. No, that's that's a dagger. Yeah, I can feel that. Yeah. Yeah. So, imagine that kid grows up with that dagger. How are they going to be at making money or or having abundance, whatever the word is. Yeah, I said abundance. Um, abundance is a great word. I'm just I The reason I mentioned the abundance is just typically it means guilt over having money. Wow. Yeah, that that that kid would um be raised in a not like and if it feels like he would be a very needy person in the world, right? Always selfish being selfish for sure. And how how do you think how hard is it for a coach to get clients if they have that like sniff of neediness as compared to It's extremely hard. the times when I'm I'm ex when I the energy feels needy. Yeah. It doesn't come. And the moments when I'm completely surrendered and just Yeah. nonattached, it it flows. Right. And I And I But if you're saying my value is based on whether this person, then it's all it's hard really not to be needy. So the so it's standing true in my value regardless of what I'm going to keep on interrupting you because what you do is that you come the idea gets settled and then you say this is what I have to do. So this idea shows up and then you immediately turn it into a task that you have to do so that you can be good enough so that you can get love. Do you see the pattern that I'm speaking to? Say that again. It's happened. Yeah. It's happened three times in the call. So basically the recognition just happened which is oh right I just need to stand in my value right and that became a to-do that you have to do so that you earn whatever it is that you want to earn which which destroys the epiphany. The epiphany in itself is oh well le actually let's go to the deeper epiphany. What is it that you have to do to deserve love? Do you have to stand true in yourself to to earn love? Just be. Yeah. Just be who I am fully. How about who you are half? Do you deserve love then? Yes. Okay. How about who you are 10%. Do you deserve love band? Yes. Okay. So, what what made you put fully on there? That became another task that you had to do and almost impossible task frankly. You're setting up these massive hurdles for you to get love. So, what makes you scared of it? What makes you scared of love? What makes you scared of abundance? What makes you scared of making a ton of money? Cuz you keep on creating these massive walls to get there. Oh man, this is God. In your head again. You've been trying to think your way out of this for at least 5 years, if not 25. I've always been super self-critical. Yeah. My mom has always said that to me. You're you are your biggest critic. Yeah. I don't uh is it happening right now? I see the sadness, but is the criticism also happening? No, it's um I just don't know why I put so much weight on my shoulders. Yeah. Like a ton. Yeah. Clearly. And it and and it feels like um it's been on me since since when I graduated. Yeah. That I I have to prove to myself I need to prove to others. Yeah. And and then you that weight you supplement with this high positive I got it. We're going we're Yeah. delusional optimist. Yeah. Which is really another form of undermining yourself. Is another form of undermining. Yeah. Yeah. I know that's a weird thing, but you can do it means I don't actually believe you can do it. Like you're if like Bill Gates, you can do it. You can you can make $200, Bill. You can do it. You'd never say that. H that positivity is also a form of doubt the way it runs in your system. So, is it being less positive? Is it being less optimistic? Is it being more realistic? Or you're trying to find your task list. Yeah. So that you can do the thing. Yes. So that you can earn the thing. I was going to ask how do I remove that? Yep. Yep. Uh yeah. Yeah. So if there's nothing you can do, what's what's left? just being well, you're trying to get somewhere and there's this task list of things to do to get there. If you can't do anything to get there, like what's like what happens to there? It doesn't it no longer exists? What does this creation of a destination? what does exist? Tell me what the destination is ultimately. What's the destination? So, you've done the work. You've hard you've figured yourself out. You've been the perfect 100% you and you've totally completely in yourself and you've got the million dollars in the bank. And then what what did all that get you? Feeling freedom, joy, excitement. Yeah. So, if there's nothing to do, where's your freedom, joy, and excitement? Being felt into right now. How does freedom, joy, and excitement attract customers, attract coaching folks? How does it attract money? You're in your head again. Mhm. Like just feel the freedom, joy, and excitement you have and just see see what does that feel like? Lighter. Yeah. Playful. Yeah. Non-attachment. Um Yeah. So even here, I'm going to with you. Even here there's a little bit of trying in what you're saying. Trying. It's like you're trying to make it real or something. There's either freedom here or there's not freedom here. There's no trying that's required. So what? Like right now are you free or are you not free? I feel very tense. Yeah. Maybe if I wasn't on this call with you, maybe I would feel a little bit more free. But right now, I feel even a little even a little bit more free is not freedom. But I'm not talking about freedom the feeling. I'm just saying like right now are you free technically? Yes. So explain that to me. How explain how technically you're free right now? I'm choosing to be on this call with you and after this call it it's the canvas is mine to paint for the rest of the day. That to me would be freedom. Yeah. Has there ever been a day in your life where the canvas hasn't been free for you to paint for the rest of the day? Like is there ever been a time where you don't get to choose? if I didn't feel like I had was able to choose when I was working full-time. Didn't feel like it but were didn't feel like it. But were you But I still had the choice. Yeah. At the end of the day was I still could choose. Yeah. Yeah. Do you ever perceive any moment in the rest of your life where your freedom isn't going to have consequences? like getting fired or not making money or pissing off somebody or letting your kid down or it will always have consequences. So, how how can you be free if it's there's always consequences? I don't know. I don't know. Right. And and relief. How? Look at the relief that came with that. The idea of freedom that you've been living with is yet another hurdle that you've given to yourself that you have to jump. I want to let go of the hurdles. I I know that ex I don't need external things to feel these emotions. I can feel them right here right now. And I've been doing I've been really deep into Jod Spence's work for the last 3 months and it's it's made it tangible understanding for me. But it's like I know I've always known I don't need these validation things to feel the way I want to feel. But I create the hurdle but I create the hurdles. Yeah. I feel good and then some reason in my mind the hurdle gets presented three hours later. Yeah. And I it's just it's intoxicating. I can just feel it and it's Yeah. It just ripples into how I show up across the board. Yeah. So, and it's not the version of who I want to be. Right. So I want to at some point touch on potentially the fact that that story you are recreating right now is a like you're doing it right now and it so you've you've gone to tactic two. First tactic was let me give a to-do list that I can do the thing to get. Tactic two is let me tell you who I am and I'm going to define myself in this way so that I can't have the thing that I want. So it but the the question that I have for you is what makes you scared of this good thing of this freedom of this abundance of this like what like this feeling of like oh I feel good. you have it and you immediately create something to stop it. What What's the What's the thing that makes that scary to feel that something's going to get in the way and create the hurdle that that I won't I will no longer feel it. That's true. The valve will get turned and all I'm feeling is now gone. That's what's going to happen for sure. There is nobody ever of any time in any ilk, no matter what the the the crazy mythology behind it is that went, "Oh, and now I feel great for the rest of my life. It's a so it's a choice to feel great essentially." No, what I'm saying is nobody gets to feel great all the time. It's always a pendulation between states. There is no permanent state. There's there's a stateless state, but I'm not going to go into that. That like you're like no matter what, there's good days and bad days. And maybe your good day in 10 years was or your bad day 10 years from now is the shittiest day. I'm sorry. Let me try that again. And maybe 10 years from now, your bad day was the best day that you had today. But there's still going to be good days and bad days, right? There's still going to be this up and down. Yes. Yeah. So, there's just Yeah. It's going to be taken away from you, and that's okay. Yeah. I mean, you're going to finish eating an ice cream cone, but you're not scared of ice cream. You have an idea about it being taken away that makes the taking away not sweet. What's the idea? What's the idea behind losing a a good feeling or losing money or losing love that doesn't make the money and the love and the freedom whatever sweet? I don't know if you had to guess. whole body gas, not just brain gas. Can you can you can you ask that one more time? Yeah. What makes it that losing the thing that makes you feel good doesn't make the thing that makes you feel good sweeter? A really great meal would not be so great if you ate it 24 hours a day. So true. Even if you ate it every day at lunch, it would not be great soon. Yeah. It It would go from this fantastic meal to just Yeah. the new standard. Yeah. So, what makes it not sweet that these things pass? Me. My relation. Of course, if we're going to blame somebody, it's going to be you. My my relationship with it. What are you not responsible for bad happening in the world? Exactly. like your world. Mhm. Your your your existence, what part of it are you not responsible for? External. Anything external? I I'm saying like well external is you could say how much money you made this year would be an external factor or you could call an internal factor. I'm saying like obviously you're not responsible for hurricanes, but it seems like you have taken full responsibility for your entire life. Anything bad that happens, a bad thought, a bad emotion, a bad It's me. It's you. What? Just I'm not saying it isn't true, but imagine for a second that you were completely not responsible for any of it. By the way, neither was anybody else. Nobody. So, you can't blame anybody and you can't blame yourself. Okay. What does that do if you do that mental experiment? What does that do to your consciousness? I mean, it just feels like I'm walking in sunshine. I I feel okay. I feel Yeah. Bliss. Yeah. Pure happiness, joy. Yeah. I don't want to keep saying I feel like pressure alleviated off my shoulders, but yeah, there's not this this weight on my chest. Yeah. So, prove to me that you're responsible. We'll tra we'll like track it right down to its root. You're responsible for not making money because of what? I'm not responsible for making money. No, you are responsible for not making money. That's how your brain normally works, right? I'm not agreeing with that. But see, well, we're going to just see logically if it makes any goddamn sense. So, you're responsible for not making money. You tell yourself that. How do you justify that? What What is it that you did or didn't do that? I'm not trying hard enough. You're not trying hard enough. That's great. And what makes it that you didn't try hard enough? Uh there's a million different ways to attract clients and you're you've tried four out of the million ways. So get on board. And what made it that you only tried four instead of 10 or 20? Time and bandwidth. Time and bandwidth. And wait, so you're responsible for time? No. Okay. Okay. Well, I'm responsible for how I spend my time. Okay. And how you spend your time is based on what your thoughts or your like what how does how do you how do you decide how to spend your time? How I how I manage my calendar. What makes you How do you determine how to manage your calendar? Priorities. How do you determine your priorities? I choose it. Choose it. Okay, cool. So, if you have choice, then you could be held responsible, right? Correct. Cool. So, choose to stop having thoughts. I can't though. Yeah, exactly. You can't even choose what thought to have next. Mhm. So your whole prioritization scheme that led to the time management that led to you not doing six and doing six instead of four or whatever down that line all comes from a thought that you can't control. This is rocking my world. It's what's crazy is I get it sometimes there's these moments where oh I choose is a very empowering thing. I get to choose is a really empowering thing. There's also a time where I chose this is a very disempowering thing. M and right now the whole you know I have I have agency is very much disempowering you when you say I have agency can you like what do you mean by that? I'm responsible for the whole king kaboodleoodle of my life. My mind just always wants to be like so I wants to just spit back the task change this do that every everything you keep saying my mind wants to go there. Yeah. Yeah. That's the habit. And you can't stop it. Ah, you don't even have control over that, right? You basically t you have already turned freedom into something wrong with you. I have this freedom, this joy, this ease of I don't have to be responsible for everything. And now I'm responsible for the fact that my brain is telling me I'm responsible for You've just gone meta. So here's a question for you. If you didn't feel responsible for your life, what do you think you would end up doing? Nothing. Ah, well then you better feel responsible for your life then. Yeah. Because if I'm not choosing which would be taking responsibility then I'm just floating it almost feels like yeah so when you were 7 years old did you do nothing no so how did how did get done then without this sense of responsibility to make the life and that you're responsible for every aspect of your How did that happen? I mean, it was the word is just like playful and curiosity at seven, right? Like there's absolutely no like the food is on the table. How do I want to do I want to go play kick the soccer ball? Do I want to ride the bicycle? Yeah. Exactly. So you just experienced something that you call bliss, joy, like oh it feels like oh that whole thing. So somehow that's going to make you stagnant. But it didn't when you were a kid, that level of freedom. But somehow the idea of I'm responsible for my entire life that and that burden is going to make you productive even though it's for the last 5 years made you stagnant. Okay, we're going to try something totally different for a second. Without going into the past or the future, tell me what's wrong with you right now. My mindset. Say again. My mindset, these beliefs patterns right now. Your beliefs in the future or in the past like I'm right now. What's wrong with you? There's nothing wrong with me. So, what are you what are you I just am. Yeah. Then what's the what are you trying to earn? What's the task list for? If there's nothing wrong with you right now and right now and right now there is no there's no task list. There's just the Sat It feels like Saturday morning. Yeah. Just like freedom of flow and just just is Yeah. Even trying to keep it is a task list. Keep that feeling. Mhm. Even that is a subtle move to build a wall that you have to jump. Would you So is what you're trying to say is is coming back to just pure presence. But then that would be a task list. Now I have to be purely present to be happier. Oh god, I knew I was going to get my world rocked on this and I love it. I feel like it's a sense of slowing down. I mean, I'm going to move out of the truth for a minute and then move into the practical, the tactical, and then I'm going to come back to the truth. Um, for lack of better words. Um, if you're looking for something that you need to do, the the most important thing is to get in touch with what's true. So to say I need to be present isn't true. You don't need to be present. I want to be true. Is that different? I mean like what's the truth right now? Are are you present? I feel very present. Yeah. Do can you imagine a time when you could say I know this sounds weird but like if you really stopped and said am I present right now? Would you ever be able to say no? No. Right. Because we're always present. We're all I mean that's the definition of it. So getting in touch with what's true is a far more effective tool than telling yourself you have to be a certain way. But what if what is true is not give me an example. Right now you're free. Right now you're present. Right now you don't have to do anything to earn love. Right now you have enough right now. People love you. Right now you're loving yourself. I don't know why even you saying you are nuts. It just hits hits home. Wow. Oh. So I want to stay with the tactical. So there's two things that can very much help you with the from this perspective from seeing this aspect. And there's a couple things you can do that can really help you with the financial abundance which is where you started and where you came in. Yeah. So one of them is so that constant internal critic that you spoke to that's happening that's you don't get to control that that's not going to stop where you do have some space is how you respond to it right so basically what happens in your head right now correct me if I'm wrong is god damn it you should be doing more why didn't you spend more time why didn't why did you only do four things you could have done six six things. Mhm. And you respond to that the way think of the politician you like the least and you think about the acolytes of that politician and they're like, "Okay, yeah, whatever." You say, "Okay." That's how you react to that voice in your head, that internal critic. You don't really get to change the critic as much as you get to change the way that you relate to the critic. So, you could say, "Hey, you know, that's pretty bad management style. Or you could say, "I see how scared you are." Or you could say, "Fuck you. Shut the up." Or you could say, "Yes, sir. I'll get right on that." Right? You have all sorts of options that you can respond to the way that that voice speaks. And so your job isn't to do any of them. Your job is to experiment. So write down 20 of them. And every day or every two days or every 3 days, pick one of them and then do it for that day or two days or 3 days. So your job is to basically just experiment. You're not trying to get anywhere. You're just experimenting with, oh, what is it like to treat the voice of my head this way? What is it like to treat the negative voice in my head that way? What is it like to treat the negative voice in my head that way? So that's one experiment very tactically. The other one is that you and your fiance every day, 10 minutes a day, have a gratitude practice. It's an out loud gratitude practice where you feel gratitude. This isn't optimism. This isn't hope. This is, oh, I'm grateful. And feel that gratitude and speak from that gratitude about all the material stuff that you have in your life. I'm so grateful that I have the ability to do podcasts. I'm so grateful that the podcast that I did created this amazing coaching session for free. I'm so grateful that we have food on the table. I'm so grateful that, you know, I I I can go get a job and what all the things. And and so you're you're just and you need to have that felt physical sense of gratitude. And so you'll say gratitude, you'll savor it like a good meal, she'll say a gratitude, she'll savor it like a good meal. And you'll just go back and forth like that for 10 minutes a day, 3 months. It's an experiment. Okay? Right? And you're not taking that and saying, "I should be grateful all the time." No, it's just you're just being grateful for that 10 minutes for what's there. And the the reason that this is important, there's several ways that this works, but right now you define yourself as somebody who doesn't have enough enough this, enough that, enough the other thing, enough time, enough energy, enough blah blah blah blah. This actually changes your self- definitionf to somebody who has enough. And if you walk around the world with I'm the person who has it plenty, then you act differently in the world. So those are just two practical things that you can take away from the from this. But it's really important. You're not doing these to get better. You're doing these as experiments. Yeah. As soon as you do as soon as you do them to get better, they will have no effect that you want in your life. And you'll notice this in your tools that you've used. Like you collect, you have collected all these tools in your life for self-development. They work for a while and then they stop working. And you'll notice that the they work until you use them to improve yourself, which means you've taken the love out. They become a form of criticism. And so the tool stops working. Wow. I'm so happy you said that part because the the ver the version of me would have went to start the gratitude. Yeah. To to get to the the the the marker. Yeah. It wouldn't have worked. That's Yeah. That's like if we're trying to change like imagine somebody says, "Okay, I want you to accept an emotion." And so you're like, "Okay, I'm going to accept my anger." But you're accepting it to get rid of it. It's not really accepting it, right? It's like it's like I'm accepting you son in the house because I want you to grow up and leave isn't really like accepting your son into the house, right? And so yes, so it is like a deep welcoming of what is. It is not a it's not a I'm going to welcome what I'm going to be present so that I can be better. It's no, it's like I so I can be with what actually is. I love that. experimenting and the gratitude. Yeah, I was checking time. Yeah. To time just kind of disappears. So, I'm like, where where are we? It does. Yeah, it it sure does. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, back to the truth. So, I told you I was going to go tactical and now I'm just kind of go back to the truth. Like I I gave you like a little like what's looking out behind your eyes right now? I don't need an answer. I just want you to get in touch with it. And now you're really trying hard to get in touch with something that's naturally there. It's just what's what's what's Yeah. There. was looking. Yeah. Is there anything that needs to be done about that? Like, is there anything that you want that's not there? It's all It's all there. Yeah. And there'll never be a moment in time in your life where you That's not the case. Total pleasure to work with you, man. Full of gratitude, Joe. This is uh I didn't know where this combo was going to go and I intentionally didn't do too much brainstorming or creating some expectation. I just knew when this got booked that something magical happened and we're just going to let it ride based on where we're at. But um I just want to say I I am so grateful of you, so grateful for this conversation, grateful for how uh those that do get a chance to listen, how this may be directly relatable for where they're at and some of the things they're working through. But um so hold on a second. I'm I'm because I can't get out of the coaching thing. I'm I really appreciative of all that, but can you do that and feel it like you were in your character a little bit for a second there? like that positive like character thing. I feel that now you don't even have to say a word. I feel that I want to coach me. That other thing I want nothing to do with Yeah. I Wow. I so appreciate you stopping me there. I appreciate you meeting me there. I'll have all your socials linked up below, but are there any final thoughts? Cuz I want you to have the last words, Joe. No, dude. I want that ended just where it ended. I wanted Yeah, that's all. And yeah, I'll stop it right there. Okay, everybody. Thanks for watching. I hope you got a ton out of it. If you want to find out more, come to arttoaccomplishment.com, sign up for a free course, or follow me at fujo Hudson onx, or just hit subscribe.

Summary

To engage in spiritual practice is to bring awareness to our evolution. In this episode, Joe and Brett unpack the relationship between exploring our inner depths and getting things done in the world, and how both can be achieved together when we see business itself as a fertile ground for self-discovery.
Transcript

Episode Intro:  Welcome to the Art of Accomplishment where we explore how deepening connection with ourselves and others leads to creating the life we want with enjoyment and ease.  I am Brett Kistler and I am here with Joe Hudson.

Brett: How is it going, Joe?

Joe: It's going great. How are you, Brett?

Brett: I am doing really well. When I talk about this podcast to people, I often have a hard time telling people if it is a business podcast, a spirituality podcast or a relationship podcast because we cover all of the bases, but really one of the things I love about what we are doing here is that it really just points to how they all come from the same place. I would love to have an episode that I could refer somebody to to say this is what I mean. Check it out.

Joe: Wow. How about if we do one that is all about business as a spiritual practice? I am not sure we can do something that ties them all together. At least my brain can't comprehend that at the moment, but I could definitely say how business and personal development can go hand in hand and what makes them go hand in hand so well.

Brett: Let's stick with that seeming dual access then of business and spirituality because I think that feels like a dichotomy for people. In this episode, let's weave those together.

Joe: That sounds awesome. I think the way I would want to start that is to just say for those who are in business and who are as old as I am, somewhere in the 70s there was this concept that you were either a businessperson or an environmentalist. You couldn't be both. In the 90s, it started showing up that we can do both of these things, and then even companies like Walmart, by the early 2000s, were doing some amazing things for the environment, like telling Barbie they needed to shrink their boxes so fewer containers would need to be shipped across the ocean. They were saying they were going to sell renewable, sustainable fish. They stopped selling certain kinds of light bulbs because they used too much energy. I remember talking to the CEO who was in charge of that. I believe his name was Lee Scott, and he said it was like sweeping thousand dollar bills off the floor. It was just so easy to make money being environmentally conscious.

I want to start off by saying it is the same thing here. I think if you really get this concept that business can be a self discovery journey and that the more ways you find for your business to be in alignment with who you are, the more successful you can be. When you see it, it is like sweeping thousand dollar bills off the floor. It can be incredibly profitable and deeply aligned. I want to start off that way to just give that metaphor out there so that when you listen to it, you are listening to it that way. This is something that can really help me be successful in business.

Brett: I imagine listeners would love to be sweeping thousand dollar bills off the floor. Do they really exist? I have never seen one. I think they are in circulation technically. Also, to do that in a way that feels aligned.

Joe: It kind of goes the other way. It is finding what it is not in alignment, putting it into alignment, which allows for the money to come. That's typically how it works, or in my experience that's how it has worked.

04:05 Brett: I heard you just use the word alignment. We opened this by speaking of spiritual practice. I want to dial in a little bit on what you mean by spiritual practice.

Joe: That's a great question. First of all, it is an incredibly loaded term typically. Anything you say in this realm, you can say spiritual practice, loaded term, and closer to God, loaded term. You could say self awareness, loaded term. Just depending on what your background is, somehow or another, these are all loaded terms. Let me give it three different ways to describe it. The first one is there is just this human development theory that says as we mature, assuming we don't get stunted with trauma, our brain moves in certain ways. We move from seeing ourselves as very individual to seeing ourselves as part of an ecosystem or part of everything. We see time as a short period of time, like a little kid who can't get excited about a birthday party that is a month away to an adult who is lucky if they can see four or five years out so they don't sign that really crappy mortgage. Maybe you start seeing time as far as generations or that infinity is in the depth of a moment, not in a length of time. That developmental path in spiritual traditions and religious traditions would be spiritual development. The other way to say it is how we evolve through our nature, how we become ourselves, and how we can be authentic. The path of development is just our natural path of development, which requires some attention but doesn't require a tremendous amount of doing, effort. That's what I mean by spiritual development.

Brett: It sounds like a fine-tuning of your experience, cleaning up both the efficiency and the enjoyment in the alignment and the flow in your experience, in your relation to yourself and to the world, and that that might be the thing we are talking about showing up in business synergistically.

Joe: Some of those are more symptoms. The way I would just say it is that as we learn more about ourselves, there is a maturation that occurs. As we understand who we are more, there is an evolution that occurs. That evolution is something that has been tracked and described by Tibetan Buddhism or Christianity or modern psychology in human development. It is pretty clearly laid out in these different ways. None of them do it exact justice. The result is eventually more joy, more alignment, and more peace.

Brett: I hear you describing the spiritual as evolution and the practice as the awareness. The spiritual practice is bringing the awareness to your evolution.  

Joe: That's beautifully said. Clearly better than I just said it. That's it.

Brett: Let's move onto what you mean by business. This can also be a trigger word and very broadly applied.

Joe: I mean it in that very broadly applied way. I mean getting crap done in life. It doesn't mean running a company. It might be being in a job. The Tibetans called it skillful means or that's the translation. They would talk about the spiritual practice of chopping wood. I don't care if it is marketing something or starting a business or being an artist. All of that is what I mean by business. What I mean is when you are getting crap done in the world, when you are making or creating stuff, or when you are producing stuff.  

Brett: The merging of these two is bringing awareness to our evolution in an applied way, applied to the crap we are getting done and to how we are showing up and where that actually impacts the world around us and the experience we have while doing it.

Joe: That's right.

09:33 Brett: If we were to lay out a basic formula for business as a spiritual practice, what would that look like?

Joe: The basic formula is the same as everything that we talk about here actually. Anything that we have said on this podcast can be applied here, but specifically it is about embracing intensity, going into the difficulty that presents itself rather than running away, learning to be more and more in connection with ourselves and others, and discerning internal alignment and moving towards the alignment instead of away from it for the short term gain or for the fear. That's generally what it is. That's the formula. That works particularly well in business.

As an example, you are running a company. Not ignoring the thing that is difficult, going and spending time in the thing that's difficult, creating connection with your customer, with yourself, with your managers, and the people who work for you is going to make the business more efficient, and really noticing everything that feels out of alignment and putting it into alignment will increase the efficiency of the business. Similarly, internally, the emotions that I run away from, can I embrace those with intensity? That's going to do a tremendous amount. Can I learn to be more connected with myself or others? That's going to teach me a tremendous amount about myself as is the embracing intensity and internal alignment. That didn't feel right. I need to address it. That didn't feel right. I need to speak it. Those same things happen whether you are working in a business or just with yourself. They apply in meditation, for instance. You are sitting in meditation, and you have a difficult experience. Can you embrace the experience? Can you connect with the experience? Can you connect more deeply with yourself with no effort, as it turns out? Can you notice the places that aren't in alignment? Can you allow them to become in alignment? It is the same thing.

Brett: We have got these three prongs of this formula, embracing intensity, connection, internal alignment. What are some other examples of what that could be applied to or where in your life you could look to see symptoms that could be bread crumbs tracing back to where this formula could be applied?

Joe: Let's say, for instance, you or your company is having a hard time making decisions. There is a lot of second guessing going on. A decision is made, and then 10 people tell you to question that decision again or you in your own head are constantly second guessing all of the decisions you have made or taking a tremendous amount of time making a decision because you are constantly second guessing it before you make it. That means there is an emotional experience you are avoiding, and so you can really use embracing intensity in that moment. You can ask in a business context what the really hard questions are. What are we trying to avoid? What are we trying to get to? What has got us scared? How are we not being courageous?

Connecting is really internally connecting with what you are scared of, your fear, and learning how to love and embrace that will totally change your decision making. The same thing with the company, whatever the decision is, how do you connect with the people it affects? How do you connect with the customers it affects? How do you get their input or recognize that connection? How do you nurture it? Similarly with internal alignment, second guessing usually means there is not an internal alignment and you need to find out what that internal alignment is or isn't and do the work there. Similarly, if there is a lot of second guessing inside of a company, usually the alignment looks like you thinking this is what you should do but you don't want to get in trouble. That's typically how that works.

Brett: Then there is a lot of second guessing the CEO or the leadership.

Joe: That's an example. Other examples would be conflict avoidance, which we just talked about, or obliteration of ego. Being defensive in business is horrible for business because you are not listening to great ideas or being open to other people's wisdom. You are making it so that other people don't share their wisdom with you. You are making it so that customers don't share with you. You stop asking customers. All of that is defensiveness. That is a protection of ego. If you allow your business to constantly shadow your ego by being non defensive, feeling all of the things, and letting yourself be wrong and be right when you are even when people disagree. All of that work is a disintegration of ego. That's an example. It is every single thing that I see that stops a client in their business or slows a client down in their business. It also slows them down in their relationships and in their self development. There is this really great way to use business as a tool to see yourself more clearly.

Brett: And widening that definition of business to something like a family, I've heard you describe that the role of a child is to obliterate the ego of the parents or one of the roles. In the business of raising a family, not the money making business but in the sense of the shit you are doing, then the obliteration of your ego is the thing that will unravel that second guessing and that conflict avoidance allowing you to receive more information and to see it more clearly with less bias.

Joe: Just to be clear about that part, let's say the second guessing and the ego obliteration. A lot of people think ego means I am super sure that I am the greatest and I know what decisions to make. Ego is really any way that you define yourself. If you define yourself as unclear and scared and that gets annihilated, then the second guessing is going to stop. You are going to be freer. There is going to be less ego, and you are going to be more capable of getting things done.

16:45 Brett: What are the benefits of this path compared to other practices? What would you describe as other practices that might be different from this or how do they all relate?

Joe: There are hundreds of practices, somatic practices, meditation, or therapy. They are all practices towards the same thing. I would say some of the benefits of using business as an avenue for spiritual growth is you don't get to fool yourself very easily in it. You can fool yourself into a somatic experience or a state of meditation, and then a little kid comes up and bothers you. You yell at the kid to get out of your way. In business, the rubber hits the road every day. Every day things are going to go wrong. How are you going to let your ego dissolve in the face of things going wrong? Every day is going to have some level of discomfort in it. There is something real about it. You can't fool yourself as easily. That's one of them.

Another one is that oftentimes there is this thing that happens in spiritual practices where someone says if they could only meditate all of the time, they could be happy, especially people who are on the search. They have that thing. In business, it just doesn't allow that sense of false separation. If you say you are going to completely separate and hang out in a cave, your business is going to fail. You don't get to have that fantasy and be consistent with your practice, whereas you can meditate two hours a day and think to yourself if you could only just give up this life, my wife and everything and hang out in the cave, then you could be happy. That sense of false separation doesn't get to be there, so that fantasy doesn't get to live there. It is very real every day.

Brett: It does seem there are cases where a business, especially ones with a large moat, a lot of momentum, and a large market share can survive for a long time without that, but eventually, the rubber hits the road. It is the same thing for leaders of countries. There are a couple of moatable ones in our world right now where the rubber is hitting the road in a major way, and they also might not be seeing it all. They might not be doing this kind of practice.

Joe: You can absolutely get away with being horrible at business for a decade if you have a really well established product. However, if you are using business as a spiritual practice and that is your consciousness, you are going to get signals constantly that what you think is working isn't working. You are going to get signals constantly that there is no separation between the two. You are going to see how you treat yourself affects your company and how you treat others affects your company. You are going to see how you can let go of control affects your company. It is the same if you are an artist. If you are really using it as a spiritual practice, you are going to see how your relationship to yourself changes your art. You are going to get to see what happens to your art when you are in constriction with yourself and when you are in flow with yourself. It is just constantly there. You don't get to pretend they are separate.

Brett: What other benefits have you seen?

Joe: There is a little less navel gazing. I notice that there are these backwaters in traditional spiritual practice where you can kind of agree with the words and the terminology of a practice and you can get lost in the scripture, if you will, instead of the felt sense of what's happening for you. That can allow a lot of navel gazing, a really beautiful form of narcissism, constantly thinking about yourself in the process. In business, if you constantly think about yourself, you are going to fail. There is something really beautiful about the business keeping it really real, and therefore, there is less time to be solipsistic. If you are, you are going to see the effect really quickly if that's how you are looking at your business. This is exactly why it is like sweeping hundred or thousand dollar bills off the floor. If you are looking at your business as spiritual practice, you are going to notice all of this stuff really quickly and do something about it really quickly. If you are not and you are doing it for power, to win, or to make a name for yourself, all of the places you don't embrace intensity, it is a lot easier to fool yourself. It is a lot easier to say the business is going well, and so everything is good. When you look at the folks that are constantly wrestling with their business and opening it up, and you read what they are talking about, oftentimes they are seeing their business as a practice when you really look closely. It really allows you to continue sharpening your sword, so to speak, rather than to let it go dull because you have made it.

A great example of this is they did this study with a whole bunch of tax records, maybe a European or Dutch study, and they looked at what tax events affected businesses. Death of children really affected the market cap of businesses, divorces, mother in law's deaths, all of these things affected businesses. One of the things that affected business dramatically, like a 10% reduction in market cap, is if the CEO built a house that was over 5,000 or 6,000 square feet. It is the idea of I have made it or my attunement is towards something else because the business wasn't the thing. It was a means to an end, and so my focus can be pulled away from it, whereas if business is a spiritual practice, it is the end. It is the means and the end. That's what allows you to fully be engaged in a way that doesn't burn you out and that you don't want to run away from it.

I remember I was recently with a group of people doing online courses, and a lot of the people's fantasy was working five hours a week and then doing what they want the rest of the time. I asked how this is not doing what you want. There is no means to an end here. For me, this is very much about the practice and it keeps me engaged.

Brett: I love that pointer to when people have succeeded in business when it was a means to an end and got what they wanted, then the business suffers and falls away. The practice here is exploring what the initial motivation was, what the power, the money, the safety, the love or the validation was seeking, and it would be really bad business not to look at what the most direct path to that is, which is also the path, the spiritual practice that we are talking about.

Joe: There is this beautiful thing that happens. If your business is a spiritual practice, then it is a lot harder to do things like burning out, not paying attention to yourself, having cross motivation or suffering an employee that doesn't feel great. All of those things create better businesses.

25:20 Brett: I imagine the objection that might come up is someone thinking they can't do everything as a spiritual path. If they want to have a business that makes bombs as a spiritual path, how does that look? Or a business that does not feel at all like it is doing something for me personally and it is the way that I need to operate to make money for my family, or that's the story.

Joe: To me, there are two questions there. The first one is what I would say to folks who say they can't do this and build a business. The first answer I would say is if you don't want to, don't. If you don't want to have a spiritual practice, don't do it because of some sense of should or have to or because it makes your business better. That won't work. Don't do it. The second thing I would say is I work with a lot of CEOs who have created multi billion dollar companies. They have thousands of people working for them, and they started those companies thinking they couldn't do it. I ask them how it is that they built a multi billion dollar company in eight years and then the idea that it could be a spiritual path, that's not possible. What the hell? How does your mind pull that one off? They do what you do. They chuckle, and they see it is a limiting perspective. Those are the two things I would say there. As far as what the downsides of this path are, I think the biggest one is it is level up mode. There is a word that my daughters use for this. It is like hard mode or extreme mode. There are a lot of distractions and reasons not to focus on your spiritual practice in business. You get 10 phone calls in a day about a customer being upset or this being done and that other thing and this emergency. How am I disconnected with myself right now? That's an advanced move. That's one of the things.

I often see that business as a spiritual practice or as a developmental tool is really well served by having some time. For me, it is usually just time completely away from the business where I can focus on my own journey and my own internal state, which is a second one. The second one is that there needs to be a certain amount of time to be able to focus on your internal state. If I just sit with myself for 20 minutes, it is different than if I sit with myself for three days, five days or ten days. There are discoveries that happen over a length of time. Oftentimes a business seems to tell you that you can't have the time to do the work, but there is a necessity for time to do some of this work. That's also a really important thing. It takes away the time and attention that really most valuable practices are needed for. That's the downside.  

Brett: I think perhaps an underlying fear that makes all of those the case, the way that it feels like it is hard mode, really intense and there are all of these distractions you can go into to, and the reason there are always not to take the time is because ultimately on this path your life as you know it may or will completely fall apart.

Joe: Will.

Brett: You will find something else that is more in alignment, and sometimes it can be a really circuitous path and sometimes more direct but ultimately it brings you into falling flat on your face faster, making more mistakes sooner, feeling the uncomfortable feelings at a faster clip than you might have previously thought you wanted to.

Joe: I think the thing about that is all can happen, and it can look like you are a radical success while it is occuring. It is not so much that your world will fall apart. Your idea of the world will fall apart or who you think you are in the world will fall apart.

Brett: Your construction of the world.

Joe: Sometimes everything looks exactly the same, but everything is entirely different. Sometimes you pivot off of one business to a whole different business, and the whole way you do business has changed. You end up making less money, but you are ten times as happy. Then that happiness is contagious, which allows you to make 20 times as much money. It is a circuitous path, for sure, but what it is it creates deeper alignment, more joy, more happiness, and more flow. It just doesn't look the way your mind might want it to look.

Brett: With that, I want to ask what the tools are from the podcast and this work that folks can use to get on or deepen into business as a spiritual path.

Joe: Every single one of them, every podcast has an application to how you would use it for business whether it is obvious or not. Let me give a couple of examples just as a way to think about it. One of them is gratitude as a big part. I think we talked about this somewhere along the line, but we used to start all of our business meetings with gratitude because it allowed us to solve problems not just from a what's wrong, how to fix it point of view, but what's right and how to grow it point of view, which created a lot more solution sets than we had when we were not doing gratitude. Also, gratitude creates more connection and more of a feeling of team cohesion. All of those things have a use. If you notice, almost all of our work has to do with ourselves and relationally, and all business is people's ideas and relationships. That's what business is at the end of the day. There is some capital, but that came from people's ideas and relationships. You could also say people's decision making. Anything that affects that is going to affect your business. That's one example.

Another recent example that comes to mind is empower over power. I was talking to a whole bunch of leaders, and I was getting them through this visualization to sit into their meetings they normally in and I was naming the reality in the meeting they might not want to pay attention to, like people were more concerned with them and people wanted to please them or rebelling against them or people wanted to make sure they were happy or were passive aggressive to them but not to other team mates. I was giving them the whole reality of what it is to be a leader and that more conversations happen about you than any other person on the team. What does that feel like? I was asking them to visualize it and feel it and really allow that into their system so they could move away from power and into empowerment. There was one person in the group who had this radical realization. She said she was doing all of this stuff to make people happy and now I see they need me to tell them what makes me happy for it to work. Her whole business changed. It was crazy how quickly her business changed. She got rid of two people and then changed the way she was leading. She told an investor they needed to settle down a little bit. She started being more directive but still listening to everybody's feedback. It just changed everything really quickly. That's just one example of moving from empowerment to power and how it can affect your business. Every one of the tools has some relationship to how you can run your business.

Brett: We will link to the episodes you just mentioned in the show notes on gratitude, love over defense, and empower over power. Given that we call this work the art of accomplishment, how does the art piece of that relate to this?

Joe: Luckily I used art as an expression at the beginning. Even if you are doing art, that's doing something. I would like to think about it the other way, which is for me business is very much an art form, meaning that just as a painter paints, they need pigment. A business man creates a business and they need revenue. That's generally the thing they need to make their art form. The only other art form that is kind of like it is a symphony in the fact that every conductor is going to do it differently. Over time your business is going to change and move and have a life of its own unlike something in the plastic arts where it is solidified and that's it, which makes it a really cool art form. You can have a business that puts light in the world or you can have a business that creates darkness in the world. You can have a business that cuts trees down or plants trees. That business can be this really amazing expression of you. Whether you like it or not, it is an art form. It is a creation that is being made and that creation is affecting people who interact with it. That's the same thing art is. For me, the art form that I want to do is that of self discovery and self realization. I want to create a piece of art that allows people who interact with it to see themselves more clearly and to see how joyful their existence is if they allow it to be. But your art form might be different. Again, it might not be about self discovery or spirituality or any of that stuff. It might be about winning, and that's great. If that's what your art form is, I say go for it. When you are 40 years old and miserable as hell, …

Brett: It might be that it was a strategy all along for self discovery and eventually it becomes apparent.

Joe: Right, or maybe it is fully in alignment and you are happy as all get out. Whatever it is, it is great. Just follow that. I trust that a lot more than some prescription that I would give.

Brett: Ultimately following what comes to you is going to be a much faster path than dominating yourself into being a different way because that's supposed to be what you are. Thank you, Joe.

Joe: A pleasure to be with you as always. Thank you, everybody. These days we are on Twitter and not just artofaccomp but fujoe, and I think we are on LinkedIn or we will be soon.

Brett: Check out the show notes for all of those links. We are on Twitter at artofaccomp and Joe is at fu_joehudson, and I am at airkistler. You can find us at artofaccomplishment.com. Check out our courses and our community. Send us questions. Check out how you can deepen into this work and get more involved. Thanks everybody.

Notes:

Empower Over Power: https://artofaccomplishment.com/podcast/empower-over-power-master-class-series-8-3/

Love Over Defense: https://artofaccomplishment.com/podcast/love-over-defense-master-class-series-9-3/

The Power of Gratitude as a Team: https://artofaccomplishment.com/podcast/the-power-of-gratitude-in-a-team-bonus-episode-3/

Summary

VIEW is a state of mind that, through a series of experiments and exercises, you can learn to drop into with ease. When we approach conversations from VIEW we are able to understand others and ourselves in any situation and in a way where even conflict can bring joy and connection.
Transcript

Episode intro:

Think about this way. If you have a conversation with a person and at the end of that conversation, they feel like they understand themselves and their business better, they want to continue to have conversations with you.

Welcome to the Art of Accomplishment, where we explore how deepening connection with ourselves and others leads to creating the life we want with enjoyment and ease.

My name is Brett Kistler. I am an adventurer, entrepreneur and a self exploration enthusiast. I am here with my co-host, Joe Hudson. Joe is a business coach who has spent decades working with some of the world´s top executives and teams developing a unique model of human patterns that underpin how we operate with ourselves, each other and the world. A good entry point into this model is a mindset called VIEW, vulnerability, impartiality, empathy and wonder.

Through understanding and cultivation we learn to easefully drop into the VIEW state of mind, deepening self awareness and increasing our connection with the world around us. To learn more about this podcast or courses, visit artofaccomplishment.com

There are so many approaches out there for deepening communication and interpersonal skills, whether in the realm of the personal or the professional. These frameworks are often composed of learned strategies and techniques that offer perspective style adjustments that may be directionally correct, but most fall short of pointing to the root conditions that facilitate true depth in human connection. What if the key ingredient at the core of strong communication was not a strategy, but a state of mind? How can we cultivate a more connective way of being through practice in our relationships as they are right now? These are the questions behind a practice we call VIEW, which we will be covering in this 5-part series.

Brett: Great. Joe, what is VIEW?

Joe: Practically, it's a way to have conversations. It's a communication methodology that allows your conversations to be far more effective. By effective, I mean more connected, more intimate and more productive, from anything from sales to product development to conversations with your husband or wife or coworker. It's particularly good at creating, like I said, more connection. Also, it's really good at embracing any kind of conflict or having difficult conversations. Practically, that's what it is. Realistically, it's a state of mind. It's communicating from a state of mind, and practicing that state of mind.

Brett: What do you mean by "realistically"?

Joe: To answer that question, I have to really talk about how the whole thing came about. The way that it came about was, I was an investor for a while. I hired this consultant at some point. This consultant had this amazing capacity. He had this capacity to do two things. One, he could sit down and have a conversation with somebody, and in a very short period of time, they could have a breakthrough where they would see themselves and the world differently in a way that gave them more freedom, and more capacity.

He also had this great ability to sell. He couldn't sell what he didn't believe in, so he always sold stuff that he really cared about, but he could sell. I would watch him sit with somebody who was absolutely the opposite of him in characteristic. He would just ask questions, and he would end up selling whatever it is that he was there to sell, about 80% of the time. I would say generally, he had an 80% hit rate in both of these two kinds of conversations.

I would say to him, "Wow, how did you do that?" He goes, "It's not the technique. You can't do this if you're channeling the technique." I've tried. This guy was a character. His name was Case. He would just be like, "You can't learn this. It's not a technique." That's what he would say. Anyway, Case got ill with cancer, unfortunately, has passed away. He wanted a very particular technique of healing that you can only find in California.

He came to California and he lived with my family. We became very close. We were very close before that. I would watch him have these conversations every day. I've learned a lot through osmosis. I had already been 20-something years of self-discovery, so a lot of it made sense to me. When he passed, I was like, "I know there's other people who can do this." I knew one famous person who could have a similar set of conversations. I was like, "I'm going to find out what makes this tick." I went around the world looking for people, found people, and realized what they all had in common. What they all had in common was VIEW, the acronym of VIEW. I'm sure we'll get into it in a second.

The main thing is that it is the state of mind that allows it. It is not the technique. That's why I say realistically, it's the state of mind because if you see this and view this as a technique, it won't work. If you see it as practicing a state of mind that allows for the technique to work if there's a technique even needed, there's definitely a technique that helps, then you can have a tremendous amount of success with it, and not just the success of like, "Wow, now I can have good conversations.” It's success in like, "Oh, now I talk to myself in a different way. Now I am in a frame of mind and I have a perspective that's more open, more free, more loving."

Brett: Come to think of that, I've seen some of the aspects of this work in other places as techniques and they just never seem to land quite as deeply, and the state of mind concept seems to really be key here. Can you explain a little bit more about that?

Joe: Neurologically and physically, when we communicate, there's a lot of things going on besides what we say. There is our body language, there is the empathy that's happening via mirror neurons, there's intonation, there's micro-expressions, there's so many things that are happening outside of language. As animals with mirror neurons, we know that that's happening. Whether we want to admit it to ourselves or not, there's some part of us that has the awareness of this stuff and they can't be faked.

Micro-expressions can't be faked. It is a representation of what's actually happening in your system on an emotional level and on a nervous system level. If you are using it as a technique, it can't work, because the actual state of mind is going to shine through in these other non-intellectual ways. If you think about that for a second, it's like this. It's a very cool thought process.

If you see people, they learn these great techniques that are out there, like nonviolent communication or something like that and all of a sudden, they've been weaponized. You just see them being weaponized. It's like you see all this communication training go south. If you've done communication training, you know you've done it and then it's gone south. It's because communication is a natural out-point of your state of mind. It can help you change your state of mind, but if you just focus on it like I'm practicing a state of mind, and that communication comes out of it, it's just far more successful.

Brett: Can you give us an example of that?

Joe: Yes. Let's say your boyfriend or girlfriend wants your undivided attention and you don't really want to give it to them. You want to watch the soccer match or you want to watch ER or whatever it is, but you decide like, "Oh, they're going to be pissed if I don't, or oh my god, I'm going to listen to the bitch forever if I don't", so then you give them your attention, but it's unwilling. It's full of resentment. It's frustrating, let's just say.

Inevitably, you'll be paying attention to the person who asked you to pay attention and then they're going to start getting frustrated. Now, you don't really want to be here and you're like, "What the hell? I just stopped what I was doing to give you the attention that you asked for. Now that's not good enough?” Who hasn´t been in this conversation?

Brett: That's how it starts.

Joe: Yes, exactly. That's how it starts, and it's because it's obvious in everything besides your language that you don't want to be there paying attention. It doesn't feel good, because we know it and that's what I mean. If the state of mind isn't, "Oh, I want to pay attention to you," it will never work. If the state of mind in the communication is "I'm trying to get something out of you," which is the antithesis of VIEW, then it'll never work, no matter what technique you use.

Brett: Then sometimes we actually are duped by believing somebody's intentions that aren't true through whatever techniques they're using. How does that work when somebody's state of mind doesn't shine through?

Joe: The state of mind, maybe if they're like sociopaths so they're not actually having a very natural human experience when they're talking to you, outside of something like that, then it's really two things that happen, when you can't sense this from other people. One is that you have something you want to believe and they are giving you that. We'll believe a lie if it rhymes with the truth that we want to believe.

Now you see this in mass media all the time. It's like, "Okay. Cool. They said that and that rhymes with what I believe, so I'm going to buy into that," or salespeople or infomercials. "Yes. You can be rich and without any effort." "Oh, I want to believe that so you can--" That's part of the ways that we get duped is, that we're actually basically duping ourselves. The other thing that happens is, that, if you study trauma and I don't mean huge trauma. That also is true, like a war trauma or a car accident of trauma, but even the minor traumas of always been criticized by somebody who is supposed to be nurturing you.

When we hear somebody that reminds us of that trauma, then we're not actually hearing them, we're not actually with them, we're with the person or people who helped us get that trauma into our bones. There's this great data on that about how you're not in the same time and space when you're moving to trauma. You see this with war veterans all the time in a major way, where they think they're in the war even though they're on their living room sofa. It happens in minor ways all the time. In those places, then we're not really aware of the person's intentions. Those are the two main ways it happens.

Brett: Those times when somebody starts acting like a child and it's like, "Wait a minute. Okay, they're acting the age they were, when the thing that this is mapping onto occurred to them."

Joe: Exactly. That's exactly right. It's why you can learn really duplicitous sales techniques and they work one out of eight times, because you're just basically fishing for the fish who wants that bait. You can do that, and it looks like it works. If you're authentic and you're actually in a deep care for the person, then it works a lot more effectively, and there's great studies on this of what the best sales techniques are.

You see that they did this with car salesmen. It was even a used car salesman. They were like, "Who are the most effective car salesmen?" There was good car salesman and really good car salesmen, and then there was these just unbelievably great salesmen, just in numbers. The cases of those unbelievably great performers, it was because they actually cared about their customer. They saw it as a relationship.

Those relationships came back over and over again. They saw their job is to really help that person be in the right vehicle, and people knew it and so it worked. The numbers were far better than the whatever it is, one in eight. You can't quote me on it, but it was something like three times the performance of an average car salesperson.

Brett: What does VIEW stand for?

Joe: The acronym. V is the vulnerability, I is impartiality, E is empathy and W is wonder. That's what it stands for, vulnerability, impartiality, empathy and wonder. That's really describing the state of mind. There's some techniques layered on top of that, not much and they're not necessary if you're actually in that vulnerable, impartial, empathetic, and full-of-wonder state of mind.

Brett: It seems like almost ways to check that you're in the state of mind. If you're in the state of mind that these point to, then you will be having vulnerability, impartiality, empathy and wonder.

Joe: Yes. It's like that. It's also they're great ways. I use these four ways to describe it, because they're great ways to sink into it quickly. If you're not there, what are the best techniques, what are the best words or reminders to get you there quickly?

Brett: That makes sense. Let's go through each of them. What do each of these mean to you?

Joe: Vulnerability is to speak your truth even when it's scary. That's what it is to be vulnerable, is to be very much yourself in your truth, even though you're scared of the result or the potential results. Impartiality is not trying to achieve an outcome for yourself or others. It's far more like wandering, than it is like goal orientation. Empathy is to be with a person in their emotions. Wonder, it's a lot like curiosity except for you're not looking for the answer. There's a lot more awe in wonder than there is in curiosity, but you're definitely not looking for the answer.

Brett: Vulnerability sounds a lot like a weakness for a lot of people. How did you come up with this definition for vulnerability?

Joe: Yes. I think the reason that people think being vulnerable as being weak is because they get confused with the difference between being weak and feeling weak. When we are vulnerable, there's often a visceral response in our bodies, an emotional response, a nervous system response like, "Oh, I'm going to get weak. I'm being weak and I'm going to get attacked." You're going to get that when you're being vulnerable, especially for the first 10 or so times.

I think that's where that confusion comes from. Vulnerable, the reason I describe it this way is, if you're not in your truth, you can't be vulnerable. If you're not in your truth, there's no exposure. If I'm pretending to be somebody else and you attack me for being somebody else, it's like, "Well, they're not really attacking me. They're attacking someone else." That's the truth part of it. Then the second part of it is even when it's scary.

Being in our truth isn't scary, if we don't think we're going to get attacked. Being in our truth isn't scary, when we don't feel like somebody will judge us, being in our truth isn't scary when we aren't scared of the consequences, and so vulnerability is being in your truth, even when we're scared of those consequences. It's really the opposite of weakness. It's actually an incredible form of strength.

Brett: Courage.

Joe: It's a very deep practice. Yes. It can take you a very long way if you practice it on a daily basis.

Brett: Yes. It reminds me of the definition of courage, which is that courage isn't the lack of fear, courage is the willingness to feel fear.

Joe: Yes. Not overcome it but feel it, that is so right. Yes. That's it. Yes, that's vulnerability.

Brett: Yes. Let's get into impartiality. It sounds impossible, especially in business. Theoretically, you could just be completely impartial in your entire life and how would you get anywhere that you want to go?

Joe: [laughs] Yes, that's the assumption.

Brett: There has to be some partiality.

Joe: Yes, there definitely is some partiality. If you really, really pay attention, every sentence that we have has some little bit of an agenda in it. It's very asymptotic in that way, meaning that we can keep on getting less and less partial, but we can't become completely 100% impartial.

What I'm talking about here is the difference between getting in your car at a very specific time to get to your job at a very specific time and making sure that you get there and getting in a car and driving around, following what feels great to follow in that moment, and wandering like the old-fashioned Sunday drive. That's what I'm talking about.

In that case, one is highly partial. It is "Let's get in the car, let's get there, let's get there on time. This is the route I want to take, and I don't want traffic and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." One of them is like, "I'm partial on the fact that I want to take a drive, but I don't care where I end up and I am here to enjoy myself," so that's the thing. The reason this is so important is because we feel when somebody has an agenda for us and we resist it.

Just tell a two-year-old to do something and the nature of them, they say no, right? The more agenda that we have and you feel with a salesperson all the time, they really want you to buy the less you want to buy. Even if you buy, you're like, "No." It's like, "Stop fucking trying to sell me." That's what I mean by agenda and with business, what's interesting is, everyone thinks that you need to be highly partial to be good at business. You do have to have a clear intention. You do have to have a clear goal. There's no doubt there.

How you get there if you're really highly partial, it's going to slow you down, because there might be 10 ways to get there that are better or quicker or better for the people who are getting you there. Impartiality is actually far more efficient as a way of getting someplace in business. The way I talk about or think about that often is, there is a river that we are on, particularly in business where there's where the customer wants to go, what's needed, what's wanted, where the employees want to go.

If you are reading that river and going with that river, then there's a lot less effort. If you decide you're going against that river, if you decide that you are going to not go with the flow but go against the flow or counterflow, it's a lot more effort and--

Brett: Or build a canal, as you've said before.

Joe: [laughs] Yes, or build a canal. Yes. That's the thing. To be impartial, it works incredibly well. I work with, as you know, some executives running companies of thousands of people, and there's this amazing click that happens when they realize like, "Oh, if I can be impartial in these ways, not give up my goal but be impartial in how this thing happens and be impartial with people, I actually discover what is, and then I can use that information and use that data to create a better plan.

“If I don't try to force a particular thing and we just agree on a goal, then all of a sudden, things move so much quicker and have so much more efficiency." It's the hardest one for people to get, impartiality. It's the hardest one for people to get. Yes.

Brett: It reminds me of an example you've mentioned before about trying to plan a whole basketball game.

Joe: That sounds like a good example. Can you tell me what it is? I've completely forgotten.

Brett: Oh, yes. You have a clear goal, which is to put the ball in the hoop, and if you try to plan the whole thing and you're partial to "No, the ball is going to go to this person now," but somebody is already in the way. Passing it to them is clearly not a good idea. If you're not open to other options, then you're not going to make it to your goal.

Joe: That's it. That's exactly it. Yes. Awesome. Thanks for remembering that.

Brett: Empathy then. Some folks feel lost in empathy, and they get lost in the other person, and they lose their own goals, they lose their own wants.

Joe: Yes. Empathy isn't that. I would say empathy is being with somebody in their emotions. It's not avoiding their emotional state, it's not trying to change their emotional state, it's not trying to make them happy, it's not trying to get them to an epiphany. Empathy is just like, "Oh, you're there and I'm with you," but it's also not being in it with them. It's not believing the story and saying, "Oh, it's true. Your husband does that, your wife does dah, dah, dah, and your boss...Oh my God, they are taking advantage." It's also not losing your own emotional state. Oftentimes, we'll be so empathetic with people that whatever they're feeling, we're feeling.

Brett: "Oh, you're right. I am the bad guy, I am terrible to you. Oh, shame."

Joe: Yes. That's a perfect way that people are empathetic in a way that they've lost themselves, so it's not true empathy. True empathy-- being with somebody, it's being next to them, it's holding their hand, it's not losing yourself in them.

Brett: Then wonder then. You said wonder and not curiosity or as opposed to or distinct from curiosity. Why not curiosity? Why wonder?

Joe: Curiosity, it's a lovely thing. It's like, "Oh, what's happening over there?" There's something that switches in your physical state. If you just, right now, think to yourself, "Oh, what's happening for Brett in this conversation?", there's an open expansiveness that happens with that question, but then as soon as you try to figure it out, something constricts. Wonder is living in the openness of the question with awe. Curiosity can be that, but curiosity can also become very focused on need the answer, need the answer, need the answer. I'm pointing, by using the word "wonder," to that being in the question without needing to get an answer.

If you just stop and think about, "What would it be like to be with a person who's just in the question with me, who just has wonder about what's happening with me and they don't need me to solve anything?" You can feel your whole system relax.

Brett: It makes for a lot of ease in a sales conversation as well.

Joe: Right. Exactly, because if you're not in that ease and you're focused on trying to figure out, "Err," then the person's mirror neurons are like, "I don't want to be around this."

Brett: In a way, all of this feels very process-based.

Joe: Yes, that's right. It's interesting that you mention it. Recently, I was watching a TED Talk on design process. One of the things that they were talking about in this lecture was how if you're shooting for a result, you won't get it. The thing you have to do is stay focused on the process, and it's going to go sideways, it's not going to go well at times, but the output is consistently better, than if you're going for a particular result.

If you look at design theory, they all talk about this process and having faith in the process and that it will lead you to the outcome. If you leave the process, it won't lead you to the outcome. This is the exact same thing. It's very much like living principled. You're saying, "Here are the principles I'm living by, because I know consistently if I live by them, it works out in the way that works for me and works for my deepest truth."

It's the same thing with this. That guy, Case, that I talked about in the earlier part of the program. He would get into these conversations because I have no idea what the hell is going to happen. He would always point it to that. That's what he's saying. He's saying that "I don't know what's going to happen, because if I did or if I tried to make it happen in a particular way, it's going to go to shit. It's far better for me to just be in this process and trust the process."

Brett: It sounds like this is a way to trust and flow with the self-organizing, social and business dynamics that are already occurring and not get in the way of them through a narrow-minded constraint or management of the process or over-management.

Joe: Yes, that's right. An example is, that for a while there I directed short films. One of the things that I learned was that if I wanted a very specific result from an actor, I'd get a horrible performance, whereas if I could give the actor a clear objective, then their performance just did really, really well. It's a really similar thought process, is that if you hold that objective and you trust in the process, then it works out.

That's not to say, this is an interesting part, because a lot of people when they start learning VIEW, they think, "Then I'm not allowed to have an opinion, or I'm not allowed to have a boundary," that's absolutely not the case. Those are really important things, and they can be actually incredibly vulnerable things to say, and in business all the time, I'll say, "What I'm not okay with is this." I'll just leave that upfront on the table. Like, "This isn't working for me. Here are the reasons it doesn't work for me. How do we solve that problem?" But then I'm impartial once I have that.

I'm even impartial as far as if someone says, "Why, what is it? What are you missing, dah, dah, dah?" I'm open to listening to that. If I'm not convinced out of it, I'm not going to pretend that I am to be in a VIEW conversation, because I can't be, because if I'm not being true to myself inside the conversation, I can't be vulnerable. I can't be impartial either, for that matter, and it's very hard to be curious.

Brett: The person's not doing business with you.

Joe: Yes, exactly. You're right, exactly, and then it's going to go to shit eventually anyhow. Exactly.

Brett: You mentioned earlier that there are techniques. This is all a process around a frame of mind that it emerges from, but that there are techniques. There must be something to help point us back to this frame of mind. Can you tell me a little more about that?

Joe: Yes. It's how and what questions. That's the entirety of the technique is to ask how and what questions. There is a technique that's more for running meetings that I've developed as well. The general thing is how and what questions, and the reason is, because they're open-ended questions. If you say, "Do you like ice cream?" I get to say yes or no. If you say, "How do you feel about ice cream?" You might hear a story of my childhood, and you might hear that chocolate chip is my favorite, then you might hear about my dairy allergy, or you might hear how I had a cow when I was a kid. You have no idea what you're going to hear. You get access to so much more data, which shows that you're actually in wonder. If you only want to hear yes or no, you're not really in wonder.

It's how/what questions, which are mainly-- because they are open questions. Obviously, there's who, what, where, when, and why. All those other ones are good, but they're just not very common. How and what are the most common ones, and we don't use why questions in the technique because of two reasons. One is most people when they're saying a why question, they're in judgment. It's, "Why'd you do that?" There's not real curiosity there. It's just like, "You should feel shitty, and I want you to make an excuse for yourself." That´s really what that communication is.

Brett: "Why wasn't this done on time?"

Joe: "Why wasn't this done on time?" It's like you're looking for them to make an excuse. You're already in a judgment place with them. Typically, not always. The other reason, that why questions don't work so well, is because they're the hardest questions to actually answer. There's somebody who said why questions are the questions that scientists can't answer. Like, "Why is the sun?" is a really hard question and I would say an unanswerable question, whereas "What makes the sun, how did the sun get there?" Those are answerable questions. That's the other thing.

Brett: At least there was a lot of information you can speak on about it.

Joe: Yes, exactly, so true. Exactly, you get information. You get data. The other thing is, usually when I talk about all this, somebody will say to me, "Yes, but you can be judgmental with how/what questions." Yes, you can. You can be judgmental with anything.

Brett: "What makes you such a dick?"

Joe: Yes. The funniest thing is when I'm doing VIEW, I might actually ask that question like, "Hey, what's making you such a dick right now?" If I say it from VIEW, if I say it with vulnerability, impartiality, if I say it like, "Oh my God, this is scary to say this to this person," but it's true for me that they're being a dick and I'm actually quite curious, I have wonder there and I don't really need them to answer in a particular way, nor do I want them not be a dick, and I actually can empathize with them, then their answers can be--. It happens all the time in my world where I can say, "What's making you such a dick right now?" and they'll laugh, or they'll say, "Oh, yes, I've had a bad day or blah, blah, blah" because it's not, "What makes you such a dick?"

Brett: One of those ways of asking it is open to all answers like, "Hey, did you have a rough day? What's going on with you?" Another one of them is just like, "You better have a really fucking good excuse for this."

Joe: That's exactly it. Why questions just imply it more, and it's easier for the person on the other side to assume it, than how or what questions. Also, how and what questions make you reframe questions in a new way, which triggers your brain. It opens your neurology for a second when you say to somebody something like, "What is it that's making you such a dick?" It's not a way we'd normally phrase the question. It does something to them and to us.

Brett: Yes. I've found after doing this work, there's been so many times I've been in a conversation, I'm about to say something and it starts with something other than how or what, and then I pause and then I find the thing I'm curious about. Then a question comes out and the conversation goes in a totally different direction.

Joe: That's right. Yes, exactly. That's what happens all the time. It's not just different. It's also far more meaningful and productive often. I'll do this in a room full of high-powered executives. After we have our first few conversations, I'll say, "You just had a 10-minute meeting. Have you ever had such a productive 10-minute meeting?" That's the moment of realization that everybody goes through where they're like, "Holy crap, without an agenda, I just solved more puzzles or I just overcame more roadblocks than I have having an hour-long meeting with a direct report, pushing them to an answer."

Brett: Right. There's a two-sidedness to it. There's the side that we'd spoke to earlier, where the open-ended questions give you more information, more data. On the other side, the person gets to be heard and speak their piece and speak to their wants and needs rather than checking a box of like, "Oh, which option was I given, vanilla or chocolate?"

Joe: Yes. Exactly. Because of that, you can actually come up with a better solution for a problem if you're in that position, in the conversation. But also, oftentimes that's all that anybody actually needs. I see this happen all the time where say a manager wants to be able to go in one direction and the people don't want to go and all they actually need is to be heard. When they get fully heard, they're like, "Okay, I'll go in that direction. That makes sense." We've all lived in that situation where we are basically being stubborn and, “No, I don't want to do it.” Then when we feel fully heard, we're like, "Oh, okay."

Brett: Almost every complaint I've ever heard about a boss or an employee has had some form of, I don't feel heard in it.

Joe: Yes. That's right. Tell me a time that you were at your peak productivity and you felt unheard.

Brett: Yes, no.

Joe: Yes. Exactly. Nobody can.

Brett: Unless I was shutting myself out from everybody else and doing peak productivity with myself.

Joe: Right. Which means that you were being productive in a team. That's right.

Brett: Let's swing back to the science around this. Tell me more about that.

Joe: There's a lot of stuff out there in psychology, neuroscience and CBT, all sorts of different kinds of studies, that support what's happening if you're in a VIEW state of mind. Let's focus on, let's say two or three of the main ones. One of them is just a simple thing. If you are under attack, you can't be curious, or if you're under attack, you can't learn because you're not curious. We know this and on many different levels. One, we know that if kids feel under stress, they don't do as well on tests. They don't learn as quickly.

We know that if two people are in a fight-- here's something you've never seen, one person's like, "You son of a blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, I hate you, dah, dah, dah and you're stupid, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." The other person says, "Oh, you know what? You're right. I get your point." We don't do that, because it's neurologically not possible. That's, let's say the extreme attack where we can never see somebody, ended up being curious or learning.

Then there's just more and more subtle forms of attack. The most subtle forms of attack are you just trying to push somebody into doing what you want them to do, be happy, stop crying, just do this task. The more that attack is there, the more you're trying to push somebody into something and be different than who they are, the less able they are to learn. That's just a simple one.

If you think about it this way, it's like, if you close your eyes and you visualize yourself running from a lion and you're running as fast as you can. It's like, you can hear the paws hitting the ground, it's catching up to you. It's going to pounce on you at any minute and it's a huge thing. You know you're dead and it's coming, it's coming, it's coming, it's coming. Here's what you don't do. You don't go, "Oh, I wonder how much it weighs.”

If you actually do that exercise and you stop and you go, "How much does this weigh?" All the fear goes away, which is why wonder is such an important thing to point to. Because if you actually stop and say, "What am I curious about, what do I have actual deep wonder for?", then the fear that you have dissipates. If you're trying to push somebody into something, that's because you're in fear. That's what creates the drama of our life, is our incapacity to love people as they are. We're scared of something and so we start trying to push them around.

Brett: This lion example, it brings up a good point. That fear is actually useful. Because if you did stop running from the lion to think about how much it weighs, then you would get eaten. Fear is helpful. It's just a lot of times in our lives, we end up having a stress response that doesn't match the actual moment. It seems like you're pointing to with the VIEW– is really cultivating a lower homeostatic set point for stress from which open-ended questions can emerge naturally and curiosity can exist.

Joe: Yes. That's exactly it. That's all together true. Then there's also a practical thing, which is we are not going to be as open, we're not going to learn as much, we are not going to want to hang out with as much people, who are scared in their conversation with us and therefore trying to control us.

Brett: We'll trust them less.

Joe: We'll trust them less. That's right. Because they're trusting themselves less. They think that they have to control something to be safe, and people who actually deeply trust themselves don't think that that's true. They know that they're safe no matter what, unless a lion is chasing them.

Brett: Yes. As mammals, we can detect that in other people a mile away. We naturally do that when we walk into a room and we find out who is the one that's the most stressed out and scared, and who's the one that's the most calm. Then subconsciously we put ourselves into pecking orders based on this.

Joe: That's right. That's exactly it. The predator smells it out and attacks the one that's-- exactly. That's it. That's that part of it. Then there's also another part of the science, is that there's-- we make decisions emotionally. If you took out our emotional centers of our brain, we stop making decisions. It would take us half an hour to decide what color pen to use. It would take us four hours to decide where to have lunch. There's a great book on this called Descartes' Error. We make decisions emotionally.

Do people pay $200 for Nike shoes because they think that it's a $200 worth of shoe? No, they're making an emotional decision. Do you buy this piece of software because you like the sales guy or the saleswoman? Do you buy this piece of software because it makes you feel safe? Do you buy this piece of software, because you beat it up and you feel like that they would have answers for it? The answer is that you are buying that piece of software based on an emotion.

You might use logic to figure out the most likely way that you would get that emotion. I don't want to be yelled at by my boss, so I'm making an emotional decision to not get yelled at and I'll use logic to figure out how to not get yelled at by my boss, but we're making emotional decisions. All the information in the world won't sell people stuff. If it was just pure information, then a Nike ad would be like, "Look at this shoe. It has 6 inches of leather siding and it has 8 holes on each side for the shoestrings." That would be, "Oh”, but it's not. You make the emotional buy.

If I'm hanging out with you, you're hanging out with me because of an emotional experience that we have when we're together. If I am buying the product, it's because I'm having an emotional experience around the product. If I am wanting intimacy with you, if I would want to call you when I'm having a problem, if I want to come home and see my parents, if I don't get offended when you tell me that you need space, all those things are based on emotions. They're not based on facts. That's really a main thing about VIEW because we're acknowledging, owning, and addressing the emotional part of a conversation.

Brett: Well, when we're making a decision, there's only so much logic you can actually do, given the time constraints and there's so much more to consider. I think what you're saying is that the emotions are a way that we make a probabilistic inference based on everything that's happened in our lives with just a feeling in our body that helps shape which questions we even ask with logic to figure out the final details and then make a decision.

Joe: Yes, there's that aspect of it and there's also the aspect of it, like, “How many decisions have you made so that you don't feel like, let's say weak. How many decisions have you made to feel loved?” Whole swaths of decisions are made over this kind of thing. A VIEW conversation allows people to have all those emotions, feel safe in them and to feel actually accepted and wanted and appreciated in that experience for who they are, which we all want.

Brett: Yes, it's important to just remember that everybody that you're in a conversation with, even in a stuffy business environment, everybody's making emotional decisions based on the things you just spoke to.

Joe: That's right, absolutely.

Brett: Tell me more about the payoff and the benefits of practicing VIEW.

Joe: This is a common story in my world. I will go into a team of people, typically it's Silicon Valley teams that I go into. It's not only Silicon Valley, but typically it is. You're talking about really smart programmers or really smart business people, and they're not getting along. I remember this one particular example, the team had like an ex-Navy seal on it and a MIT triple graduate, that kind of a team of just super intense people. They weren't getting along. They weren't being productive.

Half-day into a two-day workshop, the people who hadn't been able to get along were crying with each other because of all the pain and all that resistance in their system they could let go when they realized, the person across from me doesn't hate me, isn't trying to kill me, and isn't trying to destroy my thing. We're just not communicating with each other clearly.

It was so amazingly beautiful. That team who had not hit their performance metrics, and I think it had been three years, hit their performance metrics that quarter. That's a payoff. You get a tremendous amount of cohesion, not just between the team but between you and the people around you. We all know that when we feel deeply connected with somebody that we will go to the ends of the earth to support them and they will go to their ends of the earth to support us. That's really what we want from friends. If it's a true support, it's not dysfunctional support. It's really what we want. It's what we want in our teams. That's one benefit.

Another benefit is that most people right now are like, “Conflict, how do I avoid that?” Or, “Conflict, I'll just get through it. I'm just going to push, go get in conflict so I can get on the other side of it.” When you really understand this frame of mind, conflict is an amazing thing, because what happens every time is that conflict gives you better solutions than you had before. You start looking for conflict.

Not looking for conflict like, "Ah, here's a way I can pick a fight", but like, "Oh, there's a tension. Let's go explore it." Because I know if I explore it from this frame of mind, all of a sudden I'm going to have better solutions, better answers, and better paths forward.

It's also really a lovely state to be in. It's really quite pleasant. If you are in wonder, it's a more open and spacious feeling, than if you think you know everything all the time. Think about the people you know in your life who know everything all the time. They don't look like they're enjoying themselves.

If you think about people who are empathetic, not in somebody, but they're just like, “Oh, I can be here with you in your state, that's just a more open state.” It's just a really lovely place to be. There's the efficiency that I mentioned, like with the 10-minute sessions. The other thing is that what I noticed is, when people really get into this conversation and they start practicing it, the sense of loneliness just dissolves.

There's so many people in our society who feel very lonely and very insecure. Not insecure like I'm not good enough, but insecure like, "Oh my God, I might lose my job." When they see this technique at work and they use it and that frame of mind becomes a steady state place, what happens is, they don't have that deep experience of loneliness. They know what it is to be alone, but they're not, "Oh my God, I'm all alone and nobody loves me." That's not happening.

It's not only that the loneliness starts to dissolve, but also this sense of security shows up. The sense of security is there, because you realize that no matter what your boss says, no matter what happens, you're able to have this conversation with them that actually benefits you and them consistently.

There's a deep level of security in that, because we're not really scared of losing our job and not being able to make money. What we're really scared of is that we're not going to be of value, that we're not going to be heard and that we're not going to be able to be seen for what our value is. We're worried about losing our job, but if we know that every time we have a conversation it's valuable to ourselves and the other people around us, whenever we want that, that's a deep form of security.

Brett: Right. If we're worried about losing our, job because that would mean to us that we are not valuable anywhere, it doesn't matter if you lose your job if you know you're valuable somewhere else and you could go do something that you're valuable at.

Joe: Yes, that's right. If you think about it this way, it's like, if you have a conversation with the person and at the end of that conversation, they feel they understand themselves better, they understand their business better, they want to continue to have conversations with you. That's how it works. The thing is, you don't have to know shit to do that. You just have to ask really good questions and be vulnerable in it, to be empathetic in it, to be impartial in it and to be full of wonder in it. It doesn't even require that you have skills. It just requires that you are having a conversation with them that allows the best of them to come up.

Brett: To that, I've noticed that VIEW, it seems to be like, this magical ingredient, this special sauce. You can just pour on a workplace and it transforms relationships and teams. How do you account for this?

Joe: Yes. It's like I was saying it happened in that one company. I've seen it so consistently happen and it feels like magic. I think partially because often revenue increases, because team cohesion increases, because sales methodology improves, because the products are more connected with the customer. Product development conversations are better. There's all sorts of things that happen when people feel more connected and they're actually more in wonder. They're wondering what the right question is, they're wondering what the customer wants, and when they're willing to be vulnerable about maybe that product sucks.

There's all sorts of cool things but really, when people are met with this level of openness, when they're met with this level of care and nurturing, when they're met with this level of support, they really know it. That is what relaxes something in them. It allows them to perform at their best. Like we said at the beginning, if you know you're being judged by a team, if you know that the people in your team are not open to you, you're not going to be at your peak performance.

But if you know that that's there, if you know that you can be accepted and the boundaries will be held and you feel safe in that environment, you're going to be incredibly effective. Even if the outside world is like, man, you've got two months to solve this and you better solve it, if you've got your team there with you, that's going to get you your best performance. It's going to get you your best performance in a marriage as well. If I know that my wife deeply supports me, deeply cares about me, is open to my truth, is in deep wonder about my experiences, is vulnerably sharing with me, that's what allows me to be the best husband and vice versa.

That's really the magic of it. The magic of it isn't some technique or some state of mind. The magic of it is that it allows all of us, it creates the environment where all of us can be the best, where all of us can live in our truth. That's what's the magic. It's just like a really good soil. Then the seed of who we are gets to sprout in who we are is frickin amazing.

Brett: VIEW, vulnerability, impartiality, empathy, and wonder. This has been a great episode. Joe, thank you very much.

Joe: My pleasure, Brett. Thank you. 

[music] Greetings and welcome! I would like to start with a poem from the poet Rumi: “This is how a human being can change. There is a worm addicted to eating grape leaves. Suddenly he wakes up – call it grace, whatever, something wakes him – and he is no longer a worm, he is the entire vineyard and the orchard too, the fruit, the trunks, the growing wisdom and joy that doesn’t need to devour. This is how a human being can change.” This is a verse or poem about really the evolution of consciousness and this shifting from a… a separate self that out of fear and grasping is kind of addicted, habitual, and to that realization of connection and one-ness that allows us to really live from a place of love and wisdom. What I would like to do during this class is first ask you the question really “What is between me and that sense of that wholeness, that growing wisdom and joy?” – just to sense what is between me and that experience – and then to really look at two areas that many of us land on that seem to run interference, two areas of… of fear where we might say we are stuck as that worm that is kind of addicted to the… to the grape leaves and then just to explore how meditation can be this evolutionary strategy that allows for grace, that allows us to wake up. And… And to begin with just to say: It is totally natural that we go through a phase of being the worm eating grape leaves; I mean, that is just part of evolution too. And I don’t know how many of you either had “The Hungry Caterpillar” read to you or read it to your children or reading it to your grand-children – how many? “Hungry Caterpillar”? So that is like a good ninety percent of us. Which is a story of a hungry caterpillar that each day is eating more and more food and the food is beautiful like all these different kinds of fruits and vegetation and there is nothing wrong with it and at some point he gets really big and full and he creates a cocoon and there is a kind of stillness and then – wawoom! – he is transformed, there is the metamorphosis into that freedom of a butterfly. And so… so it is with us that we too are designed to get caught and eat and consume and build that sense of self and so on and we are designed to go “Oh, okay, enough, let’s get still!” and… and then go through another adaptation or evolutionary change. There is a… a story I heard a long time ago… This was one of my father’s favorites. And Norman and Irv were life-friends and they have a shared interest in the esoteric and… and consciousness and what happens after we die. So they make a deal that whoever dies first is going to contact the one who is still alive from the afterworld and… So Irv dies and Norman doesn’t hear from him for about a year and figures “Well, there is just no afterlife.” But one day he gets a call and it is Irv. “Oh, so there is an afterlife! What is it like?” Norman asks. Well, the response is this, he says, “Well, I sleep very late, I get up, I have a big breakfast, then I have sex, lots of sex, then I go back to sleep, but I get up for lunch, have a big lunch, have more sex, take a nap, huge dinner, more sex, go to sleep, wake up the next day…” “Oh my God,” says Norman, “So that is what heaven is like?” “Oh no,” says Irv, “I am not in heaven. I’m a moose in Wyoming. My father gave me this sense for the strange and jokes. So our evolutionary potential… this is one version, but it is generally to have us keep unfolding into wider and wider and more inclusive sense of who we are beyond a sense of a separate self. And it… And you can see in the tri… triune brain that, you know, there is the reptilian brain and that is one level of an organism feeling separate and trying to make sure nothing is going to harm it and then there is the mammalian brain where it is expanding more in going for reward and satisfaction, gratification, nourishment and then there is the primate that is going for attachment and connection and into the human ego that has all these mental ways of creating whole story about the world – and that is not the end of the trip, there is more. So what has happened in the last seventy-five-thousand or hundred-thousand years is we have kind of been in an evolutionary spurt, the primate brain, the prefrontal cortex, has developed this kind of whole network of circuits of neurons that… that jump around that create the experience of compassion and empathy and mindfulness and it is… it is sometimes called “the compassion circuitry” and the mirror-neurons are one element of it. But when this started developing in the brain human evolution went into hyper drive. And it is over that last hundred-thousand years that language and collaboration and tools all became activated. So empathy is the pre-reflective capacity to know what others are intending and feeling. And we are developing that capacity more and more. I mean, evolution selected for mirror-neurons, okay, it is part of what we are becoming, it is advantageous in terms of experiencing relatedness and interconnection for us to not only survive but to flourish. And then we have this capacity for self-reflection, for mindfulness. So we actually have the wiring to recognize what we are beyond a separate self. This kind of enlarged sense of being, a more formless quality of presence. And that is what Rumi was pointing to. That grace that lets us realize we are beyond the worm – we are the vineyard and the orchard and a growing wisdom and joy. So this is really the hope of the planet this evolving sense of what we are beyond a separate self because then we move from fight-flight-freeze to the attending and befriending that can actually help take us past making war on each other and destroying the earth. Now there are two clusters of fears and wants that are very common ones and when they are activated this more recently evolved part of our brain that lets us feel empathy and be mindful gets cut off, it gets deactivated. And you might consider these two clusters as the cluster that says “Oops, something is wrong” – something is wrong right now or about to go wrong – and the other cluster is saying “something is missing, I need something more”. They both have the each other embedded in it. But you can sense these especially in our ego-self as two kind of distinctive versions of when we get more small and cut off. So the first one is a fear of failure and you might also consider it a fear of deficiency, of being not enough and of rejection. So that is fear of failure – FOF. The second one is a fear of missing out – FOMO. Okay, FOF and FOMO. And I am… I am in a way dedicating this talk to Tim Ferriss who a number of you probably heard of who is… does a wonderful podcast and he was the one that turned me on to the word FOMO because he… we had an interview and I learned a lot from him in our interview and FOMO was one of my take-aways. Fear of missing out. And when we are caught in FOMO we are not as concerned about failure-deficiency, that is actually more primitive part of the brain, we are really concerned with missing out on opportunities for pleasure, for gratification, for more fame or accomplishment or fulfillment of whatever we are seeking. So we are going to take these and look at them each one. I am going to invite you to sense how these are living in you. And then we are going to look at how meditation can be a strategy to evolve us so we are not caught in them, so we can take the energies in them that are really wise and alive but not be caught in them. Okay, so FOF. Fear of failure and fear of deficiency. I really… It was really brought to my mind last week when I was talking to a friend who says, “You know, I have really gotten to the root of what is going on for me which is I just feel around the corner I am going to fail. It is like I won’t be prepared, then I am just going to fall short.” And it could have to do with anything whether it is letting down my daughters or my partner or my friends.” And when we talked about it… like underneath is this just this sense of… of shame and a sense of isolation. But there is many versions. I have known many that are very… people that are in the public eye, people that are really well-known that have what is called imposter-syndrome which is a version of FOF which is, you know, “I look good, I sound good, other people have bought in but they will find out because underneath something is wrong and I am going to fail”. The fear of failure is rooted deep in the reptilian brain. It is like that basic part of us that wants to avoid harm. So it is very primal, it is the primal fear of a separate self. I am going to fail. It is not going to be okay. I am going to be annihilated. Now for primates when it doesn’t… if a primate is not involved with a life-death issue the default position of the mind is to compare to others. So what that means is “I am going to lose respect and love”. That is the form of death. “I am not enough and yo… so…” What primates do is they see where they are in the packing order, right? Are they going to be part of the herd or are they going to be left out? And of course some cultures make it even more acute. If you are part of a culture that is always rating you for, you know, in school for how well you do or for you… you know… for your intelligence or what kind of intelligence you have or your looks, if you are being rated you are going… underneath there is going to be an insecurity. I was thinking about children a lot with this and how our schools and education does breed in the fear of failure and has kids trying to prove that they know things. We grow up trying to show that we are smarter than we are, it is a big… there is a brig… big incentive to convincing people. I saw a test for children, it says “Name six animals which live specifically in the arctic”. And here is the child’s answer: “Two polar bears, and then three (and that is crossed off) four seals”. Think that that was a great answer. “What was Sir Walter Raleigh famous for?” “He is a noted figure in history because he invented cigarettes and started the craze for bicycles”. “What happens during puberty to a boy?” “He says goodbye to his childhood and enters adultery”. I just give you one more: “What is a vibration?” “Well there are good vibrations and bad vibrations. Good vibrations were discovered in the nineteen-sixties”. So the fear of failure – FOF – has all sorts of expressions and sub-sets. I was talking to my husband Jonathan about it, you know, “What is… What is your version?” and he said, “I am… I am FOBI.” And I said, “I?” He goes, “Fear of being included.” So we all have them. So here… What happens is that when we have this… some fear of deficiency or failure our sense of who we are gets organized around it. And we develop strategies to try to compensate for it or cover it up. And those strategies you are familiar with. I mean, you… we have explored this before many times in the talks I have given ways that we try to prove ourselves or get approval or pretend as I have mentioned, but the strategies and the feeling tone become a real core sense of “Oh, so this is what I am”. And when we are in that cocoon of the ego-self that feels deficient or defective and is… is addicted to eating the leaves, is trying to find ways to prove ourselves – because that is the addiction to prove and get approval – we are cut off from those parts of our brain and our consciousness really that have a larger sense of belonging. So let us take a pause here. I am just going to invite you to check in and see how you might be experiencing in your life this one cluster of fears – fear of failure – just to investigate it a little. The first step of widening your identity, not being caught in the cocoon of fear, is to just investigate, just to notice it, witness it. So you might bear witness without judgment and just ask yourself: So where do I become afraid of falling short? You know, is it in work? Is it in certain relationships? Is there a fear of making the kind of mistake that will have you re… lose people’s respect or love? If there is one situation that is a good example for you where you anticipate failure, where you habitually run into the fear of failure or the fear of rejection, take a moment to let yourself go inside it a bit. The kind of thoughts that go on, what you believe or anticipate is going to happen that is wrong and bad, what are your strategies for trying to protect yourself, just notice how fear of failure, fear of rejection lives in your body or your heart. And as part of witnessing it sense that this isn’t so much “my fear” or… is “the fear”. This is one of “the archetypal”, universal human fears. So you are bearing witness to what it is like when the human self is caught in that particular cocoon, how the mind gets narrowed and the body gets contracted, and see if you can just witness with kindness. This is the fear of failure. This what is… what it is like. And if you get familiar with that then you can begin to take the steps to extricate, to loosen, to wake up out of. So continuing to explore these. We are going to now look at the fear of missing out – FOMO. And that really comes from the mammalian brain, this primal urge to thrive, and it is the urge and the emotions that are trying to seek nourishment and enhancement and reward. So just to say it is not as primitive as fear of failure. In other words: If you are caught in fear of failure – FOF – that trumps FOMO, that will… that will grab your attention. So that can’t be as prominent for FOMO to really set in. So I could see it in my dog. I was thinking about it this morning how I wake up and she is eagerly tracking my every move and… because she doesn’t want to miss out on our walk. And even if there is some time after I get up before the walk and she could go outside and she could be enjoying things she stays riveted because she is afraid of missing out, she is anticipating pleasure but she has got the stress of not getting so she can’t just relax and enjoy her moments. And that to me is the same idea that we get anxious about getting and achieving what we want. And the anxiety is: It matters to us and we might not get it. We might miss out on perhaps the fame that… fame that is possible or the money or often it is having peak-experiences just wanting to live fully, but sometimes it is the fear of missing out on a new technology or the deepest spiritual teachings, missing out on a trick to reverse balding or to live longer, whatever it is, it is like this fear that we are going to miss… miss the boat. Depending on the degree of our unmet needs – in other words the degree of not maybe… to the degree we haven’t gotten the gratification or recognition that we want – it intensifies the tension of FOMO, there is more of a fear that we are going to miss out on something. And it is interesting that with each of these clusters of fears there is certain neurotransmitters that are particularly related to them. So that with the fear of missing out there is more Dopamine that is involved – there is Dopamine which is anticipating pleasure and novelty – so that maybe... that you have a certain cocktail or mix in your body of Dopamine, there is Norepinephrine which is the pleasure and reward dependent system – these are different accesses – we each have a mix of neurotransmitters that in a way it is like we are born with them and they can be affected by how we pay attention and how we live. So we might… At some point I was thinking how you could have it included in your personals, you know, here is my particular neurochemical mix, you know, “Oh Mary is mid-Dopamine, high in Serotonin and high in Estrogen” and that gives you a sense of “Oh yeah, right, that is what Mary is like”. Well, so it is. We have our mixes. So what happens when we are caught in the grasping of FOMO where we are addicted to the grape leafs is that we… our… our vision gets smaller, the aperture gets smaller, we don’t remember the rest of the world so much because our attention gets very fixated. A mother was preparing pancakes for her sons Kevin five and Ryan three. The boys began to argue over who would get the first pancake. So the mother saw an opportunity for a moral lesson to broaden their view. She said, “If Jesus was sitting here he would say, ‘Let my brother have the first pancake. I can wait!’ So Kevin turned to his younger brother and said, ‘Ryan, you can have the first chance at being Jesus!” So when we are caught in FOMO there is this… we get very strategic and sometimes manipulative and very fixated, there is an ambitiousness about getting what we want – an overdoing, an over consuming, always trying to get more experience, more life, get it right. There is a… a essay I have always loved about… because (0:22:00) is always trying to get the final word on nutrition. So in this one the Japanese eat very little fat and suffer fewer heart attacks than the British or Americans. The French eat a lot of fat and also suffer fewer heart attacks than the British or the Americans. The Japanese eat… drink very little red wine and suffer fewer heart attacks than the Brits or the Yanks. Now the Italians drink huge amounts of red wine and they also suffer fewer heart attacks than the above. The Germans drink a lot of beer… Well, it goes on and on and on. The conclusion: Eat and drink what you like, it is speaking English that kills you. So in both of these clusters of fear we are kind of talking about an evolutionary process where there is a fear or there is a wanting and when we get fixated we get into a kind of cocoon where we haven’t… we are not… we are cut off from really all that we can be. For FOMO I think one of the most potent expressions comes from the teachings of Kashmir Servasian which says, “First there is the suffering of separation. Then the suffering of not enough. Then the urge to have to do something to be complete.” So the suffering is this: When we are caught in the feeling of “I am about to miss out on something, I need something more” it means that we can’t really open to and embody and live the fullness of what is right here, it cuts us off from the present moment. Why don’t we take a moment to reflect on FOMO to see where it lives for you? So you might ask yourself: What is it you are really wanting or feeling compelled toward that you are anxious about not getting? – Maybe some special opportunity that you will miss. It might be an opportunity for a new role at work or for an investment that could really bear fruit, opportunity to have involvement with certain people you value to be included in some situation that matters, opportunity to work with a certain teacher or trainer, maybe your fear of missing out – it is one of the deep one on “I don’t want to miss out on having children or having a romantic relationship”, or maybe it is something to do with your youth “I don’t want to miss out on something to do with having my body be able to do certain things”. Wherever you feel that sense of missing out, that kind of anxiety and… and kind of grasping towards, that… that narrowing or fixating, let yourself go inside it. And just get familiar with it in a very bodily way. What does your heart feel like when you are caught in FOMO? What is your mind like? Your body like? And like the fear of failure just widen enough to remember that this isn’t… not your fear of missing out it is “the fear of missing out”, it is part of the mammalian brain to seek gratification, to want to make sure to get rewards… And you are bearing witness to how this human self is when caught in this conditioning. So bring some kindness to it. Now here is the important thing to know about working with FOF and FOMO and that is that, while each of them has the kind of conditioning that if we get caught in it, it keeps us small, it keeps us from really evolving and… and experiencing our full potential, each is also a portal that if we deepen our attention actually brings alive that potential, that if we deepen our attention when we are caught in the fear of failure, when we are caught in that fear of rejection, of missing out, not of missing out in the sense of fear of missing out but of getting cut off from what we love, the life we love, the more we deepen attention to it the more we discover a kind of timeless belonging that takes us beyond that fear; and with FOMO the more we get in touch with that fear of missing out and that wanting for gratification the more we discover that what we want it is always here and we tap into an absolute infinite flow of creativity, of dynamism. So let me just bring this… ground this a little in a few examples. One woman I was working with that was working with the fear of failure… this was at a retreat on the West Coast and… is an African-American woman at a month-long retreat, so it was a real intensive one, and she was encountering a lot of fear and insecurity about falling short, about rejection from those really not feeling intimate and connected with those she loved, being rejected, and she was really, really brave, and our… we worked together and she would contact it fully because the basics of meditation have two pieces; one is that to be mindful of what is here to evolve out of a sense of fear, you need to contact it, you have to touch it directly,, it is like breathe in and feel it. She was doing that, she was feeling it. But you also have to be able to hold it in a… like you are breathing out in a larger space so it can transform and unfold. This is the way evolution works, it doesn’t get rid of something, you don’t get rid of the reptilian brain, you include it in the mammalian and the primate brain, they are embedded, you don’t get rid of fear, you include it in a larger space of presence. So she was working with it and contacting and contacting trying to bring care to it but it was really strong. Well, one of her interviews she came in with a really cheerful smile. And I said, kind of, you know, “What happened?” And she said, “Well, I went to church this morning.” Well, if you know anything about these retreats, you don’t leave campus. So I was kind of surprised. She goes, “Oh yeah, I went to church and we were saying the gospel, it was rich and it was beautiful!” And I was thinking to myself, “Okay, well, I am pragmatic, if this is what worked, you know, that… that she went to church, okay.” Because she was really glowing. So I was trying to imagine it that she was leaving and getting in a car, going on a highway, you know, because we were… it gets very quiet at these month-long retreats. But, anyway, I kind of let go. And she goes on, “Oh, I was”… this is what she said, “I was feeling that same fear and feelings of failure I told you about while I was at church and I was praying to be able to love myself and then as I was saying the gospel I wrapped Jesus like a shawl around me and the peace just filled my heart and I haven’t taken the shawl of, that… that love is warming me up.” So it was with that inner jolt I realized that she had… had gone to church in an energetic metaphor, right, she had not left campus and that she had been blessed, she had touched grace, because she had connected with what is called the second wing. The first wing she was already doing; she was contacting the fear of failure. But the second wing is… is holding it in a larger space of caring. So our identity shifts. We are no longer a victim of the fear, we become that witnessing compassionate presence. That was the metamorphosis. That is the caterpillar that is busy hungry eating, trying to prove itself, trying to be better person - coming into stillness and that shift into that freedom that was what she experienced. I wrote down what she said, “Now I am wearing this shawl while I walk those hills and while I sip my tea and standing in line at lunch,” and she gave me one these mischievous looks, she goes, “Tara, even in the shower I am wearing that shawl.” You know, it was great. So this is the process of integration where the fear becomes a portal to love by intensifying our presence it deepens. Now working with the fear of failure and a fear of disconnection from others we can work on it with meditation ourselves and we can also work on it and experience that kind of healing and evolutionary shift with each other. Meditation is not solo, off in a cave on a cushion. We meditate with each other, wake up together. And one of the stories I have always loved of that is a woman – a nun actually, Sister Helen Roser – wrote about teaching at a small catholic school and she was teaching math students. And they were learning a new math and they were all getting discouraged and edgy and having a really hard time. And she could feel this… the fear of failure, she could feel it in the room. She stopped the class. She had them list the names of their classmates on two sheets of paper – it was a small group – and in the space between each name she would have them write down the nicest thing they could say about that classmate. The next Monday, she… she correlated the list and next Monday she gave each student their own list and she heard the whispers in the room, “I didn’t know others thought that about me!” “I never knew that meant anything to anyone!” And the group was much more bonded. In fact, for the rest of the year she could feel this… all these like invisible bonds of connection created. Several years later, she got a message from the parents of one of her students in that class. And this was back a while ago when she wrote the story. He… His name was Mark and he was killed in the war. And she got a message from his parents that he was killed in Vietnam. And she had been very close with her students and he was one very… she loved him, he was fun-loving and good-humored and very sincere. So she went to the funeral. And all of the classmates were there. And at one point Mark’s father said he wanted to show her something. So he took a wallet out of his pocket and he said, “They found this on Mark when he was killed and we thought you might recognize it.” And carefully removed these two worn pieces of notebook paper that had obviously been taped and folded and refolded many times. And it was the list that she had given each student with the good things written on it. At that point… and all the students, all the classmates, were around and another one said, “Oh I still have my list, it is in the top drawer of my desk!” and another one said, “Oh Jack asked me to put his in our wedding album!” another said, “It is in my diary!” and another one pulled one out right on the spot. So that was the moment they could cry and really just open together to… to the loss. So I share this because in working with these fears – whether it is fear of failure, fear of rejection, fear of loss, fear of missing out – we need to bring both the capacity to touch into the fear but also a wider sense of what is true. We need to remember space, we need to remember presence, we need to remember love for there to be that kind of integration and transformation. So to give an example for how that works with FOMO, the fear of missing out, I was reflecting on myself and on those two clusters for myself. And I am kind of borderline I… I am like have tons of both, it is not like I mainline on one or the other. And so I was trying to think through history of all the times of fear of missing out whether it was missing out… hanging out with the kids in high school I most wanted to hang out with or having special adventures in college, out in nature, or whether it was missing out as I have spiritual life on the best teacher or the best practice, you know, I could see it throughout. So I will tell you one example of when I was young and much more neurotic. This was last week. Actually this is… It started a few years ago when I was… when my book “True Refuge” was about to come out and I had someone in our community was really good at marketing say, “I want to get on your team and I am going to show you a bit about marketing!” And so she joined with me and Janet, my assistant, who is the person who is really responsible for all these podcasts being out and anything in the cyber world and Facebook presence and everything, incredible energy! So this woman and Janet got together and she started to tell me things about, you know, what would be needed, which involved, you know, me getting much more actively… you know, producing more blog posts and seeing how all the tweeting fit into the Facebooking fit… things that, you know, I just had not been involved with… And how we needed to grab… you have to… when people get your website you have to grab their names for – this is the language – grab their names for an email list, you grow your email… Well, it is ambition, ambition, and… and so it was like I was feeling this pressure and getting involved in and I could feel in myself this growing sense of because everybody else was doing it I had this fear of missing out, like my presence out in the cyber-world it would rely on me, just grabbing opportunities and doing more and… So it was really very striking to me this feeling of kind of edgy-ness that started building in my system around it. And when I caught it I didn’t have the word FOMO then but I realized that that was the feeling that I was supposed to jump on a… a wave and ride it and make sure it was the biggest possible wave I could… you know, that kind of thing. So I stopped internally. And I started deepening attention. And what I asked myself, “What was I afraid of missing out on? What was this wave that if I missed it I… I would lose, what is it I was wanting to have happen out of all this?” And when I asked that question I started to reconnect and I went away from stats, you know, and I started reconnecting “Oh, you know, I love these practices of waking up, of waking up our hearts and minds, I just want them to be out there more.” And when I started feeling that sincerity I started sensing, you know, what matters to me is I want to live in that sense of loving awareness and just to express it, I want my life to be an expression of it. And then I said, “Well, wait a minute! Isn’t that right here now?” It is like what I am wanting from getting more blog posts out and grabbing names and having a bigger email list – the loving awareness and living and expressing it – it is right here now. If we dig deep into FOMO we will find what we most deeply want, what we are most deeply afraid of missing out on, is always and already here. The ego-delusion in FOMO is that it is down the road somewhere else. So I practiced much as I described with this other woman of just feeling the anxty-ness feeling it but also sensing that loving presence that is right here, feeling the anxt, I… kind of “there is something more, there is something more” but feeling “oh, right here, right here” until… What I found happened for me is it really did become a portal because I felt this increasing aliveness that what I was seeking was right here and I would share with people and the big question that comes from FOMO-people is, “But wait a minute! If I think what I am seeking is right here then I won’t be motivated to do anything. How am I going to be motivated to make the investment or seek out the other teachings or read the books?” And what happens is actually the more that we realize that what we long for is right here, the more we are resting in awareness – the more the natural intelligence and aliveness of the universe flows through us and we keep on being creative and engaged, it is just not so driven by ego, there is another kind of intelligence that guides us – because I don’t feel I have gotten less engaged with things, I just feel there is less of a self that is organized around it. D. H. Lawrence puts it this way: “When we get out of the glass bottles of our ego and when we escape like squirrels turning in the cages of our personality and get into the forest again, we will shiver with cold and fright, but things will happen to us so that we don’t know ourselves. Cool, undying life will rush in and passion will make our bodies with power. We shall stamp our feet with new power. And old things will fall down. We shall laugh and institutions will curl up like burned paper.” So the point is this that these fears can either trap us so that we are the worm addicted to eating grape leaves – we are kind of spinning in our own cocoon – always thinking that what we want is ahead of us or that what we fear is around the corner and not really being able to find the love and aliveness that is right here and, if those clusters of fear come up, we use them to deepen our attention, it wakes us up. No matter the fear – whether it is “something is missing” or “something is wrong” – when it is included in a larger field of presence it taps us into the love and aliveness that is right here. And just to say that it is not a one-shot. It is not like once I caught on to the fact that this whole marketing-thing was raving up my FOMO and I got… got a wind of it, then all of a sudden I was just in a dynamic creative place but not ego-caught up. It is like… it kept re-appearing. But each time I would pause and have to say, “Wait a minute! What am I really longing for? And isn’t it already here?” The kind of ego-grasping would loosen and then I would get to re-engage but in a much more creative relaxed way. I have given the metaphor that I find really, really helpful that each time we pause and bring mindful presence to what is going on it is like the process of dying a piece of cloth to indigo, the color, the richness of indigo. And for those that aren’t familiar: If you take a white cloth and you dip it into a vat of indigo dye when you pull it out it is just a tiny bit, you know, first it, you know, it looks like it is blue but then it fades to a little bit just off white so you have to rinse it and dip it again and then you pull it out and you will notice that it fades down but a little more of the blue holds and every time you dip it into the vat and pull it out a little more of that vibrant, rich indigo color is in it. And… And so it is with these practices of mindfulness that every time you encounter the fear of failure, the fear of missing out, and you are willing to pause and feel it in your body and hold it with that kindness and presence, each time you will more and more sense a truer kind of being-ness rather than the confined ego-self. You will sense you are resting in something larger. So let’s practice a little and then we will just close together. I want to give you a chance just to pick one thing where you feel you get caught, where you’re a bit in the cocoon and cut off from all that you can be. And just get a taste of how you might work with it. So as you pause, let yourself come into the present moment, just feel your breath and your body… and pick one area where you know you get hooked, somewhere where you get that you’re fearing failure or rejection or fearing missing out, where you get smaller, where your vision narrows, there’s tightness, where you lose track of some of the larger truths… and see if you can pick a particular situation that most represents when you get stuck… sensing what you’re afraid of… and honestly letting yourself connect with the fear – and for some it might be a mix of fear and wanting – and just feel how it is in your body as an energy, just sense what it is like. If it helps to use the breath, you can sense as you breathe in that you are just agreeing to feel and contact where that lives. This is the wing of mindful contact - noticing and opening to what’s here. And you might sense as you connect with the fear and the wanting, what it is that you are most wishing for. If you are afraid of failure, what is it… what’s the space or love or acceptance or forgiveness that might most hold this fear? For many of us if we are afraid of falling short, there’s this real yearning to feel belonging to… to others and to life, to really trust that, to know that we belong to this living web, we can’t fall out of it. So you can breathe in and feel the fear, but breathe out and sense the whole web of life that you belong to, that loving awareness that you are part of. Or if it’s the fear of missing out, just sensing what it is you are really longing for. Are you longing to feel a sense of contributing or a sense of full aliveness or a sense of full creativity? Then breathe in and feel the fear and breathe out and sense how that is already here. Just breathe into what is already here. The liberating question with FOMO is: Isn’t what I am longing for already here? Breathe out and sense how it is already here. Sense as you bring more presence to these fears the shift in your own experience of who you are, the shift from the victim of fear, the one who is caught in fear, to the witness, to that wisdom and compassion that’s bearing witness. “This is how a human being can change. There is a worm addicted to eating grape leaves. Suddenly he wakes up – call it grace, whatever – something wakes him and he’s no longer a worm. He’s the entire vineyard and the orchard too, the fruit, the trunks - a growing wisdom and joy that doesn’t need to devoir.” Namaste and thank you for your attention.

"by Tara Brach
(The following article originally appeared in the Spring 2001 issue of Inquiring Mind (vol. 17, number 2). www.inquiringmind.com
It’s here in all the pieces of my shame
That now I find myself again.
I yearn to belong to something, to be contained
In an all-embracing mind that sees me. . . .
—Rainer Maria Rilke
Our most fundamental sense of well-being 
is derived from the conscious experience of belonging. Relatedness is 
essential to survival. When we feel part of the whole, connected to our 
bodies, each other, and the living Earth, there is a sense of inherent 
rightness, of being wakeful and in love. The experience of universal 
belonging is at the heart of all mystical traditions. In realizing 
non-separation, we come home to our primordial and true nature.
The Buddha taught that suffering arises 
out of feeling separate. To the degree that we identify as a separate 
self, we have the feeling that something is wrong, something is missing.
 We want life to be different from the way it is. An acute sense of 
separation—living inside of a contracted and isolated self—amplifies 
feelings of vulnerability and fear, grasping and aversion. Feeling 
separate is an existential trance in which we have forgotten the 
wholeness of our being.
Never in the history of the world has the 
belief in a separate self been so exaggerated and prevalent as it is now
 in the twenty-first century in the West. In contrast to Asian and other
 traditional societies, our distinctive mode of identification is as 
individuals, without stable pre-existing contexts of belonging to 
families, communities, tribes or religious groups. Our desperate efforts
 to enhance and protect this fragile self have caused an unprecedented 
degree of severed belonging at all levels in our society. In our 
attempts to dominate the natural world, we have separated ourselves from
 the Earth. In our efforts to prove and defend ourselves, we have 
separated ourselves from each other. Managing life from our mental 
control towers, we have separated ourselves from our bodies and hearts.
With our Western experience of an 
extremely isolated self, we exemplify fully what the Buddha described as
 self-centered suffering. If we identify as a separate self, we become 
the background “owner” of whatever occurs. Ajahn Buddhadasa, a 
twentieth-century Thai meditation master, describes this conditioning to
 attach an idea of self to experience as “I-ing” and my-ing. Life 
happens emotions well up, sensations arise, events come and go and we 
then add onto the experiences that they are happening to me, because of 
me.
When inevitable pain arises, we take it 
personally. We are diagnosed with a disease or go through a divorce, and
 we perceive that we are the cause of unpleasantness (we’re deficient) 
or that we are the weak and vulnerable victim (still deficient). Since 
everything that happens reflects on me, when something seems wrong, the 
source of wrong is me. The defining characteristic of the trance of 
separation is this feeling and fearing of deficiency.
Both our upbringing and our culture 
provide the immediate breeding ground for this contemporary epidemic of 
feeling deficient and unworthy. Many of us have grown up with parents 
who gave us messages about where we fell short and how we should be 
different from the way we are. We were told to be special, to look a 
certain way, to act a certain way, to work harder, to win, to succeed, 
to make a difference, and not to be too demanding, shy or loud. An 
indirect but insidious message for many has been, “Don’t be needy.” 
Because our culture so values independence, self-reliance and strength, 
even the word needy evokes shame. To be considered as needy is utterly 
demeaning, contemptible. And yet, we all have needs—physical, sexual, 
emotional, spiritual. So the basic message is, “Your natural way of 
being is not okay; to be acceptable you must be different from the way 
you are.”
Almost two decades ago, author John 
Bradshaw and others enlarged our cultural self-awareness by calling 
attention to the crippling effect of shame. Since then, many have 
recognized the pervasive presence of shame much as we might an invisible
 toxin in the air we breathe. Feeling “not good enough” is that often 
unseen engine that drives our daily behavior and life choices. Fear of 
failure and rejection feeds addictive behavior. We become trapped in 
workaholism—an endless striving to accomplish—and we overconsume to numb
 the persistent presence of fear.
In the most fundamental way, the fear of 
deficiency prevents us from being intimate or at ease anywhere. Failure 
could be around any corner, so it is hard to lay down our hypervigilance
 and relax. Whether we fear being exposed as defective either to 
ourselves or to others, we carry the sense that if they knew . . . , 
they wouldn’t love us. A winning entry in a Washington Post T-shirt 
contest highlights the underlying assumption of personal deficiency that
 is so emblematic of our Western culture: “I have occasional delusions 
of adequacy.”
During high school, I consciously 
struggled with not liking myself, but during college I was distressed by
 the degree of self-aversion. On a weekend outing, a roommate described 
her inner process as “becoming her own best friend.” I broke down 
sobbing, overwhelmed at the degree to which I was unfriendly toward my 
life. My habit for years had been to be harsh and judgmental toward what
 I perceived as a clearly flawed self. My attachment to self-improvement
 transferred itself into the domain of spiritual practice. While I 
realized at the time that kindness was intrinsic to the spiritual path, 
in retrospect it is clear how feeling unworthy directly shaped my 
approach to spiritual life.
I moved into an ashram and spent twelve 
years trying to be more pure—waking up early, doing hours of yoga and 
meditation, organizing my life around service and community. I had some 
idea that if I really applied myself, it would take eight or ten years 
to awaken spiritually. The activities were wholesome, but I was still 
aiming to upgrade a flagging self. Periodically I would go to see a 
spiritual teacher I admired and inquire, “So, how am I doing? What else 
can I do?” Invariably these different teachers responded, “Just relax.” I
 wasn’t sure what they meant, but I didn’t think they really meant 
“relax.” How could they? I clearly wasn’t “there” yet.
During a six-week Buddhist meditation 
retreat, I spent at least twelve days with a stomach virus. Not only was
 there physical discomfort, but I found that I made myself “wrong” for 
being sick. Having already struggled with chronic sickness, this retreat
 made it clear just how harshly I had been relating to myself. Sickness 
had become another sign of personal deficiency. My assumption was that I
 didn’t know how to take care of myself. I feared that being sick 
reflected unworthiness and a basic lack of spiritual maturity.
In one of the evening dharma talks, a 
teacher said, “The boundary to what we can accept is the boundary to our
 freedom.” For me this rang incredibly true. I had been hitting that 
boundary repeatedly, contracted by the almost invisible tendency to 
believe something was wrong with me. Wrong if I was fatigued, wrong if 
my mind was wandering, wrong if I was anxious, wrong if I was depressed.
 The overlay of shame converted unpleasant experiences into a verdict on
 self. Pain turned into suffering. In the moment that I made myself 
wrong, the world got small and tight. I was in the trance of 
unworthiness.
Several years ago, at a meeting with a 
group of Western teachers, the Dalai Lama expressed astonishment at the 
degree of self-aversion and feelings of unworthiness reported by Western
 students. I know many friends and students who have found, as I did, 
that even after decades of spiritual practice, they are still painfully 
burdened by feelings of personal deficiency. Many assumed that 
meditation alone would take care of it. Instead, they found that deep 
pockets of shame and self-aversion had a stubborn way of persisting over
 the years.
Carl Jung describes a paradigm shift in 
understanding the spiritual path: Rather than climbing up a ladder 
seeking perfection, we are unfolding into wholeness. We are not trying 
to transcend or vanquish the difficult energies that we consider 
wrong—the fear, shame, jealousy, anger. This only creates a shadow that 
fuels our sense of deficiency. Rather, we are learning to turn around 
and embrace life in all its realness—broken, messy, vivid, alive.
Yet even when our intention in spiritual 
practice is to include the difficult energies, we still have strong 
conditioning to resist their pain. The experience of shame—feeling 
fundamentally deficient—is so excruciating that we will do whatever we 
can to avoid it. The etymology of the word shame is “to cover.” Rather 
than feel the rawness of shame, we develop life strategies to cover and 
compensate for its presence. We stay physically busy and mentally 
preoccupied, absorbed in endless self-improvement projects. We numb 
ourselves with food and other substances. We try to control and change 
ourselves with self-judgment or relieve insecurity by blaming others. We
 are so sufficiently defended that we can spend years meditating and 
never really include in awareness the feared and rejected parts of our 
experience.
Often those who feel plagued by not being 
good enough are drawn to idealistic cosmologies that highlight the sense
 of personal deficiency but offer the possibility of becoming a 
dramatically different person. The quest for perfection is based on the 
assumption that we are faulty and must purify and transcend our lower 
nature. This perception of spiritual hierarchy, of progressing from a 
lower to a higher self, can be found in elements of most Western and 
Eastern religions.
When we are in the process of trying to 
ascend, we never arrive and always feel spiritually insufficient. This 
was clearly the case during my first years of practice in pursuit of 
becoming a more perfect yogi. The temporary and passing states of peace 
or rapture were never enough to soothe my underlying sense of 
unworthiness. I felt continuously compelled to do more. An alternative 
face of such insecurity is spiritual pride. The very 
accomplishments—like improved concentration or periods of bliss—if owned
 by the self, reinforce a sense of a deficient self that is moving up 
the ladder. With either pride or shame, our awareness is identified as 
an entity that is separate and afraid of failure.
In my own unfolding, as well as with 
friends, clients and dharma students, an intentional spotlight on shame 
and unworthiness has been enormously revealing. Many people have told me
 that when they realize how pervasive their self-aversion is and how 
long their life has been imprisoned by shame, it brings up a sense of 
grief as well as life-giving hope. Fear of deficiency is a prison that 
prevents us from belonging to our world. Healing and freedom become 
possible as we include the shadow—the unwanted, unseen and unfelt parts 
of our being—in a wakeful and compassionate awareness.
For a child to feel belonging, he or she 
needs to feel understood and loved. We each feel a fundamental sense of 
connectedness when we are seen and when what is seen is held in love. We
 habitually relate to our inner life in the same way that others 
attended to us. When our parents (and the larger culture) don’t respond 
to our fears, are too preoccupied to really listen to our needs or send 
messages that we are falling short, we then adopt similar ways of 
relating to our own being. We disconnect and banish parts of our inner 
life.
Meditation practices are a form of 
spiritual reparenting. We are transforming these deeply rooted patterns 
of inner relating by learning to bring mindfulness and compassion to our
 life. An open and accepting attention is radical because it flies in 
the face of our conditioning to assess what is happening as wrong. We 
are deconditioning the habit of turning against ourselves, discovering 
that in this moment’s experience nothing is missing or wrong.
The trance of unworthiness, sustained by 
the movement of blaming, striving and self-numbing, begins to lift when 
we stop the action. The Buddha engaged in his mythic process of 
awakening after coming to rest under the bodhi tree. We start to cut 
through the trance in the moment that we, like the Buddha, discontinue 
our activity and pay attention. Our willingness to stop and look—what I 
call the sacred art of pausing—is at the center of all spiritual 
practice. Because we get so lost in our fear-driven busyness, we need to
 pause frequently.
The Buddha realized his natural wisdom and
 compassion through a night-long encounter with the forces of greed, 
hatred and delusion. We face the shadow deities by pausing and attending
 to whatever presents itself—judgment, depression, anxiety, obsessive 
thinking, compulsive behavior. Because shame and fear often are not 
fully conscious, we can deepen this attention by inquiring into what is 
happening. Caring self-inquiry invites the habitually hidden parts of 
our being into awareness.
If I pause in the midst of feeling even 
mildly anxious or depressed and ask, “What am I believing?” I usually 
discover an assumption that I am falling short or about to fail in some 
way. The emotions around this belief become more conscious as I further 
inquire, “What wants attention or acceptance in this moment?” Frequently
 I find contractions of fear under the story of insufficiency. I find 
that the trance is sustained only when I reject or resist experience. As
 I recognize the mental story and open directly to the bodily sense of 
fear, the trance of unworthiness begins to dissolve.
There are times that the grip of fear and 
shame is overt and vicelike. At a retreat I led a few years ago a young 
man named Ron came into an interview with me and announced that he was 
the most judgmental person in the world. He went on to prove his point, 
describing how scathing he was toward his every thought, mood and 
behavior. When he felt back pain, he concluded that he was an “out of 
shape couch potato, not fit for a zafu.” When his mind wandered, he 
concluded he was hopeless as a meditator. During the lovingkindness 
meditation, he was disgusted to find that his heart felt like a cold 
stone. In approaching an interview with me, he felt caught in the clutch
 of fear, embarrassed that he would be wasting my time. While others 
were not exempt, his most constant barrage of hostility was directed at 
himself. I asked him if he knew how long he had been turning so harshly 
on himself. He paused for quite a while, his eyes welling up with tears.
 It was for as long as he could remember. He had joined in with his 
mother, relentlessly badgering himself and turning away from the hurt in
 his heart.
The recognition of how many moments of his
 life had been lost to self-hatred brought up a deep sorrow. I invited 
him to sense where his body felt the most pain and vulnerability. He 
pointed to his heart, and I asked him how he felt toward his hurting 
heart at that moment. “Sad,” he responded, “and very sorry.” I 
encouraged him to communicate that to his inner life—to put his hand on 
his heart and send the message, “I care about this suffering.” As he did
 so, Ron began to weep deeply.
In Buddhist meditation, a traditional 
compassion practice is to see suffering and offer our prayer of care. 
Thich Nhat Hanh suggests that when we are with someone who is in pain, 
we might offer this deeply healing message: “Darling, I care about your 
suffering.” We rarely offer this care or tenderness to ourselves. We are
 definitely not used to touching ourselves, bringing the same tenderness
 that we might to stroking the cheek of a sleeping child, and gently 
placing a hand on our own cheek or heart. For the remaining days of the 
retreat, this was Ron’s practice. When he became aware of judging, he 
would consciously feel the vulnerability in his body—the place that for 
so long had felt pushed away, frightened, rejected. With a very gentle 
touch, he would place his hand on his heart and send the prayer of care.
 Ron was sitting in the front of the meditation hall, and I noticed that
 his hand was almost always resting on his heart.
When we met before the closing of the 
retreat, Ron’s whole countenance was transformed. His edges had 
softened, his body was relaxed, his eyes were bright. Rather than 
feeling embarrassed, he seemed glad to see me. He said that the 
judgments had been persistent but not so brutal. By feeling the 
woundedness and offering care, he had opened out of the rigid roles of 
judge and accused. He went on to tell me something that had touched him 
deeply. When he had been walking in the woods, he passed a woman who was
 standing still and crying quietly. He stopped several minutes later 
down the trail and could feel his heart hold and care for her sadness. 
Self-hatred had walled him off from his world. The experience of 
connection and caring for another was the blessing of a heart that was 
opening.
The Buddha said that our fear is great, 
but greater yet is the truth of our connectedness. Whereas Ron was able 
to rediscover connection and loosen the trance of unworthiness by 
tenderly offering kindness to his wounds, we might feel too small, too 
tight and aversive to open to the pain that is moving through us. At 
these times it helps to reach out, to discover an enlarged belonging 
through our friends, sangha, family and the living Earth. A man 
approached the Dalai Lama and asked him how to deal with the enormous 
fear he was feeling. The Dalai Lama responded that he should imagine he 
was in the lap of the Buddha.
Any pathway toward remembering our 
belonging to this world alleviates the trance of separation and 
unworthiness. After his night under the bodhi tree, the Buddha was very 
awake but not fully liberated. Mara had retreated but not vanished. With
 his right hand, the Buddha touched the ground and called on the Earth 
goddess to bear witness. By reaching out and honoring his connectedness 
to all life, his belonging to the web of life, the Buddha realized the 
fullness of freedom.
We are not walking this path alone, 
building spiritual muscles, climbing the ladder to become more perfect. 
Rather, we are discovering the truth of our relatedness through 
belonging to these bodies and emotions, to each other, and to this whole
 natural world. As we realize our belonging, the trance of unworthiness 
dissolves. In its place is not worthiness; that is another assessment of
 self. Rather, we are no longer compelled to blame or hide or fix our 
being. When we turn and embrace what has felt so personal, we awaken 
from feelings of separateness and find that we are in love with all of 
life"
"During high school, I consciously 
struggled with not liking myself, yet it was during college that I 
became distressed by the intensity of my self-aversion. On a weekend 
outing, a roommate described her inner process as “becoming her own best
 friend,” and I broke down sobbing, overwhelmed at the degree to which I
 was unfriendly toward myself. For years my habit had been to be harsh 
and judgmental toward what I perceived as a clearly flawed self. I 
judged myself for falling short as a daughter and friend, condemned 
myself for being too heavy, felt that my moods were too extreme, my 
performance at school less than what it should be.
In retrospect, I realized I was living in 
what I call the Trance of Unworthiness. This experience of personal 
deficiency is a pervasive form of suffering, with its roots in societal 
norms that assign superior value to certain races, types of 
intelligence, appearance, sexual orientation, behavior, and performance.
 As messengers of the culture, parents often communicate that to be 
loved and approved, we need to be special, to look and act a certain 
way, work harder, win, succeed, make a difference, and to also not be 
too demanding, shy, or loud. Basically, the familiar message is, “Your 
natural way of being is not okay; to be acceptable you must be different
 from the way you are.”
Our feelings of deficiency are a trance 
because, while we might realize we judge ourselves too much, we are 
rarely aware of how thoroughly a felt sense of falling short affixes 
itself to all our relationships, to work, to many moments of daily life.
 When in this trance, we are living in an imprisoning perception of who 
we are. When strong, our beliefs and feelings of deficiency prevent us 
from being intimate and authentic with anyone; we sense that we are 
intrinsically flawed and others will find out. Because the fear of 
failure is constant, it is difficult to lay down our hyper-vigilance and
 just relax. Instead, we are consumed with hiding our flaws and/or 
trying to be a better person.
After college, my strategy of perpetual 
self-improvement ended up transferring into my spiritual practice. I 
moved into an ashram, and for the next dozen years attempted to become 
more pure—waking up early, doing hours of yoga and meditation, 
organizing my life around service and community. I thought that if I 
really applied myself, it would take eight or ten years to awaken 
spiritually. The activities were wholesome, but I was still aiming to 
upgrade a flagging self. Periodically, I would inquire of my teachers, 
“So, how am I doing? What else can I do?” Invariably, they would all 
respond, “Just relax.” I wasn’t sure what they meant, but I didn’t think
 they really meant “relax.” How could they? I clearly wasn’t “there” 
yet.
A moment of transforming insight occurred 
during a six-week Buddhist meditation retreat. I had spent at least 
twelve days with a stomach virus. Not only was there physical 
discomfort, but I was feeling “wrong” for being sick. My assumption was 
that I didn’t know how to take care of myself, that being sick reflected
 unworthiness and a basic lack of spiritual maturity.
During an evening talk, a teacher at the 
retreat said, “The boundary to what we can accept is the boundary to our
 freedom.” For me, this rang incredibly true. I’d been hitting that 
boundary repeatedly, contracted by the almost invisible tendency to 
believe something was wrong with me. Wrong if I was fatigued, wrong if 
my mind was wandering, wrong if I was anxious, wrong if I was depressed.
 In the moment that I made myself wrong, the world got small and tight, 
and instantly, I was in the trance of unworthiness.
Carl Jung describes a paradigm shift in 
understanding the spiritual path: Rather than climbing up a ladder 
seeking perfection, we are unfolding into wholeness. We’re not trying to
 transcend or vanquish the difficult energies we consider wrong—the 
fear, shame, jealousy, anger—since this only creates a shadow that fuels
 our sense of deficiency. Rather, we’re learning to turn around and 
embrace life in all its realness—broken, messy, vivid, alive. This is 
the way out of trance: mindfully recognizing and bringing compassion to 
the parts of our being we have habitually ignored, pushed away, 
condemned.
This open and accepting attention is 
radical, because it flies in the face of our conditioning to assess 
what’s happening as wrong. We are de-conditioning the habit of turning 
against ourselves. Each time we can mindfully pause and refrain from 
fear-based activities of blaming, striving, or self-numbing, the trance 
of unworthiness begins to lift. It is this willingness to stop and 
deepen our attention—what I call ‘the sacred art of pausing’—that is at 
the center of all spiritual practice. Because we get so lost in our 
fear-driven reactivity, we need to pause frequently.
If I pause in the midst of feeling even 
mildly anxious or depressed and ask, “What am I believing?” I usually 
discover an assumption that I’m falling short or about to fail in some 
way. The emotions around this belief become more conscious as I further 
inquire, “What wants attention or acceptance in this moment?”
Frequently, I find contractions of fear 
under the story of insufficiency. The more I can recognize the mental 
story and open directly to the bodily sense of fear with radical 
acceptance and compassion, the more than trance of unworthiness begins 
to dissolve. Rather than the impossible climb to perfection, I’m 
relaxing and opening into wholeness.
While extremely painful, the trance of 
unworthiness and its energies of raw shame and fear is a portal to 
profound transformation. The first step is the realization that we are 
imprisoned in this trance.
As we begin to awaken through mindful and 
loving presence, we don’t land in a sense of worthiness, which is just 
another assessment of self. Rather, the very sense of a separate self 
becomes increasingly porous and transparent, and we begin to rest more 
and more in the light-filled space of awareness that regards ourselves 
and all beings with appreciation and love. It is this shift in identity 
that expresses our true healing and growing freedom."

[music] [music] Namaste. Welcome. Thank you for being here. Friends, I want to start with a favorite story from Tom Wolf's book called The Right Stuff. And it it starts out going in the 1950s, a few elite US Air Force pilots were assigned to a life or death mission to fly higher than ever before. And beyond the Earth's denser atmosphere, they discovered that the familiar laws of aerodynamics no longer applied. So a plane could suddenly tumble end over end. It was like a cereal bowl on a wax for mica counter. The first pilots responded instinctively and they were frantically working the controls trying to stabilize the aircraft. But the more they intervened, the more violent the tumbling became. And you could hear these panic calls to ground control. What do I do next? And they were followed by fatal crashes. This pattern continued until Chuck Jerger stumbled upon the only solution. When his plane began tumbling, he was slammed unconscious and helpless. The aircraft plunged for miles until it re-entered denser atmosphere where normal aerodynamics returned and Jerger regained consciousness and then he could steady the plane and land safely. So the lesson was stark and counterintuitive. The only way to survive was to do nothing to take your hands off the controls. As Wolf writes, it was the only choice you had. So in spiritual life, we continuously encounter parts of ourselves trying to survive by managing. And in the domains that most deeply impact us and here I'm speaking of aging, sickness, dying, love, intimacy, serving, creativity, presence. Controlling doesn't work. Our flourishing, our freedom comes from letting be, from letting go of the controls. I sometimes think of it as decommissioning the inner controller. So this is the theme of next of the next two weeks and it's one of the most popular from the archives. It's this radical practice of letting go of controlling, of opening to our fullness of being. So may it serve well. I'd like to begin with a classic story where a novice wants to enter a monastery is talking to the abbot and saying well how long will it take me to be enlightened and the abbott's response is 10 years and then the novice says well what if I try extra hard the response is 20 years hey wait a minute you first said 10 for you 30 and you know we get it that ego striving is not going to work. You know that trying to get somewhere is not what liberates. Um I think of willfulness and striving and controlling as kind of a clenched fist that we're actively squeezing and it cuts off life. So that the understanding is we can only experience real ease, aliveness, freedom by relaxing open, by letting go of the clench. And the Buddha taught something really radical which is that freedom, love, peace, happiness is always and already here in the moments of non-clinging, of non-resisting. In other words, in moments of presence when we're not trying to control life, when we're not trying to make it different. So of course there's a reason that we don't have that many moments of peace and freedom and that is it's not easy to let go of controlling. It's not easy to open to life just as it is. Because we have this deep conditioning to think that something's missing, that something's wrong. And then to clench, you know, to in some way tighten in our body, to have our mind clench into, you know, small-minded thoughts, uh, to clench into judgments, into beliefs. I'd like to share a story about Lester Levenson who was the founder of the Sedona method. Some of you may have heard of it. It's a psychological spiritual healing process. So Lester, when he was in his 40s, he got really sick. He had heart failure. He had colon cancer. At at one point, his doctor just sent him home basically to die. So it you know he was facing this death sentence and he began to reflect deeply and he had studied all the world philosophies you know he was very uh educated and learned and he looked at everything he had learned and said where has this brought me what has it given to me and he dropped his ideas about life and he very directly inquired he really is quiring right to his colon in a sense, what is your belief? And he realized the belief was actually a demand that the world be different. That he was always living with this belief, this demand that the world be different. And then he asked himself, well, do I really need this? You know, he was becoming aware. Do I really need this? and he realized he didn't. And then in the time that followed, he let go. He dropped that demand and he healed. You know, he sensed that beingness that's beyond the separate self, the separate self that demands life be different. So his pathway was a letting go and unclenching the fist that was holding the belief. This is going to be the theme of our reflection. Uh this letting go that frees our heart that reveals the fullness, the truth of who we are. And we'll do it in several parts. We'll be centering on four key domains of letting go. letting go of our clinging to thoughts. Letting go of our resistance to feelings, sensations, unhooking beliefs, and letting go of the armoring around the heart. So, we start in with definition. Uh letting go, it's misunderstood. Sometimes we think of letting go as another activity we're doing and it's not that. It's not some willful egoic act. Letting go actually is an undoing of the clenching. It's an undoing of the ways we're holding on. And that happens naturally as we bring awareness to experience to get a taste. And we'll be doing this a few times. I'd like to keep touching right back into direct experience in this talk. So, let's pause. If you can close your eyes or lower your gaze and just begin to notice what's going on inside and take a few full breaths. Gather yourself. Bring yourself here. from the Tibetan teachings. Let go of what has passed. Let go of what may come. Let go of what is happening now. Don't try to figure anything out. Don't try to make anything happen. Relax right now and rest. Even a taste of letting go is a taste of freedom. And there's a good reason we hold on so tightly. So if your eyes are closed, feel free to open them. So here's the thing. To survive, we need to control some. We need to do what we can to avoid danger. We need to pursue shelters, mates for many. In other words, we need to be motivated to do whatever helps us and our kin thrive. So, it's part of our evolutionary design and our unfolding to develop an ego that tries to control life. That is part of the deal that we are rigged to try to control ourselves and others and the world. Uh it's part of trying to promote survival. So, our mechanisms, we grasp, we hold on, we resist, we push away. We have that clenched fist. And if we begin to explore that and it's really interesting to investigate, we'll find that our deepest most familiar sense of self is that felt sense of the me that's trying to control life to get what we want. We're trying to control life and get more food or promotion or approval. That's a very familiar sense of self. Or we feel that sense of that self that's trying to avoid what we fear, trying to avoid getting sick or falling short in some way or avoid another's judgment or avoid uncertainty. That's a very familiar core sense of self, this controlling self. In a similar way, if we investigate during the day, you know, as we're moving through the day, we'll find that most moments there's some background sense that something's missing or something's wrong that we need to control, that we need to do something, that we need to do something to avoid what's right around the corner that could really cause trouble. We need to in some way make life more safe or more comfortable or more pleasant or more complete. Take any conversation you had today, yesterday and just remind yourself of it. It's more than likely that the egoic self was controlling, trying to in some way create a certain impression in the other person's mind, trying to be liked, trying to be respected, trying to be understood, trying to have the other person do something a certain way, trying to protect yourself from judgment on some level rather RA than a spontaneous free sharing based in presence. There's that bit of that clenched fist. We can see it. And if we investigate and look at the controlling moment to moment, we can see in the most subtle ways the way we want this moment to be different. that we're trying to change this moment by moving away from it with our thoughts, by physically moving, by avoiding in some way the unpleasantness, seeking more comfort. We want the next moment to contain what this moment does not. So, we control. Now, here's the challenge with controlling. While there are domains in daily life where we often can and may need to control, it's part of survival, you know, controlling perhaps in a day-to-day way when we get up or making sure our children or pets are fed, that we're fed, you know, what task we're going to prioritize, taking our supplements, paying our bills, who we're going to text, who we're going to email, this whole realm, you know, stopping at a red light. There's a certain domain we can control, but the most important dimensions of life are beyond our control. And you know what I'm speaking of. You know, aging, sickness, the economy, you know, world events, how others behave. Life is essentially unpredictable. It's uncertain. You know, I think about this Sylvia cartoon. Some of you may have seen these. She's in the role of a psychic and uh the woman that's talking to her says, "You know, my husband, he won't talk about his feelings." And she's upset about that. And Sylvia said, "Well, all right. We'll see what we can do." So, she looks in her crystal ball [snorts] and then she says, "You know, in February 2024, men will start talking about their feelings in moments. women across the country will be sorry. So we try to control what is beyond us and ultimately and here's the the root of it. This self does not want to die and most controlling is rooted in our efforts to manage our fear of death of great loss and death. So here we are. We're in this impermanent life. It has inevitable pain and loss. And if we're chronically trying to control, if we're always wanting life different, trying to secure ourselves against loss, we become a bundle of tense muscles protecting our existence. You know, we're not living fully. One of the most uh basic truths found in Buddhism and other spiritual traditions is that our ongoing compulsion to control, you know, to grasp and resist what's happening, it's what gives rise to suffering. And in Buddhism, the word is duka, which is really a much better word than suffering in a way because it can range from, and this you're familiar with, that kind of subtle background sense of uneasiness, offbalance, not fully here to real anguish. And duka arises because basically we're at odds with reality. We're in some way trying to control, fight, resist how it is. Like Lester, we're wanting life different. So here's the thing. Our ego, our controlling ego is a good servant. You know, we need to navigate as wisely as we can, but not a good master. Chronic controlling, you know, always wanting something, fearing something, it makes our lives small. And and this isn't abstract. I mean, you might reflect for a moment. Again, just review maybe the past day or so and remind yourself of a time when you were caught in some sort of a anxious doing kind of mode. Just take a moment, just time of stress in the last few days. And just try to sense in what's it like when you're anxiously managing life, when there's that tightness, can you also feel present? Do you have access to a wise perspective? Do you feel at home in yourself? Do you feel connected to others, creative? It's not that hard to see. I can do it myself so easily that the clenching is there. That there's thoughts kind of circling in a repetitive small-minded way. The body is tight. There's not a sense of inhabiting and and feeling the aliveness of the body. There's just a tightness. Heart's not open, disconnected from others. This is the clenched fist, the controlling ego. And when we're in control mode, we're not able to inhabit a larger truth. You know, John O'Donn said it so beautifully. He said, "We're so busy managing our life that we forget this great mystery we're involved in. We forget. We forget the larger beingness that really expresses who we are. Okay. So this core identity we have as a ego self with the habit of control it's part of the evolutionary story. It's all of us humans from the get-go. But it's not the end of the story. We also have this capacity to wake up to let go into something larger to experience who we are beyond that separateness. And if you're listening, you've touched this. You know intuitively that your essence is deeper and vaster than ego, than the thoughts and the behaviors and the personality. There's a deeper mystery. And you might taste this when you're experiencing the arising of love or compassion. When you're feeling real energetic aliveness, connectedness, stillness, that sense of something more can occur in nature. You know, when you're with loved ones, maybe births, deaths, meditations, in moments where there's presence and no controlling. Let's pause again, my friends. Let's just pause. Take a few full breaths. Maybe close your eyes or lower your gaze. Let go of what has passed. Let go of what may come. Let go of what is happening now. Don't try to figure anything out. Don't try to make anything happen. Relax right now and rest. Perhaps as you do so, you can sense a little bit of a wider space of awareness, mystery, something more. and you've touched it. We've all had moments of relaxing the fist, not controlling, but we tend not to pause and savor and appreciate them. And you've probably also noticed that the experiences that we have of enlarged beingness, where we feel we're touching something more, a deeper truth, they quickly get compartmentalized. In other words, you might have a really good morning meditation and feel really open and peaceful and then as soon as you begin daily tasks, contract right back into that anxious, controlling, managing ego. I'll share one of my most humbling experiences. And this is I I did a my first long retreat. My son was young and my ex-husband was taking care of my son. And um when I at the end of the retreat I was feeling just you know in love with the world the whole world in my heart very spacious and open and just kind. So I got home and it probably was within about five minutes that I blew up at my ex-husband. Um he had he hadn't mailed a bill that I'd asked him to mail. Now, and I'll say right here that aggression, you know, losing it, shouting, that's a form of controlling. It's the clenched fist. So, it really brings up this question, you know, if we get so compartmentalized and it doesn't that that awareness doesn't um bleed into daily life, what wakes us up to a larger reality in a more full and stable way? And the answer I think many of you might have a good sense of which is dooka. It's really the pain that wakes us up. The the pain of our anger or our fear or shame or our hurt that it invites us to deepen attention. It wakes up awareness. And awareness is our superpower. The ego doesn't let go. It's awareness that undoes the clutch, relaxes the resistance. I think of it sometimes, the image I have is the ego as kind of this ice cube and it's clenching and preserving and protecting its separate ice cubby form. And awareness is the light of the sun and it dissolves the clinging. It relaxes and dissolves the ice, which is really just another form of water back into the flow. And in my case, um, on that time after blowing up at my ex-husband, my ice cubess lasted through the day. In other words, the continued squeezing occurred as I ran all my self-righteous, indignant thoughts and blaming thoughts and so on. He should be different. Should is always um a controlling ego word. It's a clench fist. Finally later in the day, I started feeling these deep waves of disappointment and sorrow that I was so stuck and just that pain of separation. You know, he was my ex-husband, but he we were very fortunate. He's remained a dear friend. So, it was painful. So enter dooka. You know the suffering actually started waking me up and it made it possible to bring awareness to the angry thoughts and feelings. So I wasn't inside them believing them. The awareness allowed me to inhabit a larger space of presence. And then it allowed me to the awareness could then tend to the underlying fears, a sense of powerlessness. And as awareness deepened, it filled with tenderness. There was this letting go and inhabiting a larger space beyond the ice cubby controlling ego. And that is the process that awareness dissolves the clinging. It allows the letting go into a larger space, a relinquishing of a smaller identity, you know, the angry self into more openness. There's another metaphor. Um, I hope mixing metaphors doesn't create a problem, but I like the image of a caterpillar in a cocoon and how natural it is to be in the caterpillar phase and be living in the what we'll call the egoic identity where we're reacting and protecting and doing those things. And it's developmentally natural to evolve to a larger wholeness to the butterfly that has the freedom of a much larger space. So duka is the pressure of the cocoon saying it's time. You need to inhabit a larger being. It's time to let go. There's more to experience. And that of course requires awareness, you know, letting go of clinging to it's not so easy because it's familiar. Cocoon is familiar and safe and the cocoon is our habitual thinking and the cocoon is our judgment. It's painful. And Duga is saying it's time to open into the mystery. [sighs] I'm spending time on this on Duka on suffering. anger, fear, because it's not bad. It's it's not a mistake. Let dooka be our signal, our calling to let go, to let go of the obsessive thinking and the limiting beliefs and the resistance to the feelings, the armoring in the heart. Let go. Let go into a bigger reality. [sighs] Okay, friends. So, for the remainder of this, we're going to talk about how meditation can help us undo the clench, the fearful ego, and open more into a larger beness. And today, as I mentioned, we're doing this in several parts. The key focus will be letting go of our obsessive thinking, our fixation on thoughts. And this is a critical primary domain. And the reason is thinking is our major strategy of control. And we spend huge amounts of time in our mental control tower. You know, [clears throat] worrying, planning, rehearsing, preparing, navigating to protect and further the egoic self. You know how when we're in traffic, everyone else is the traffic? [laughter] You know, it's like we're living inside a home video incessant inner dialogue. And of course, the main protagonist is Mwa. Might be extended to mua and ma's close kin, but it's mwa, my concerns, you know, what is happening to me. That's the main theme. What what we're worried about, how others are treating me, what needs to get done. This is the movie we're in, and we're holding on to it. There is clinging to this movie. You know, there's one of my favorite little comic strip cartoons is this man in a bar and he's talking to the bartender and he just says, "I know I'm nothing, but I'm all I can think about." [gasps] And it's so understandable. You know, we're addicted and we're hooked on thinking and we believe our thoughts. I mean, consider today for a moment. Just just you and let yourself kind of review the day for a moment and just notice how much were you inside that movie lost in thoughts all centering around organized around swirling around self. You've probably noticed that our inner dialogue is not only incessant and self-focused. Our thoughts are incredibly repetitive. I mean, I read somewhere that we have 60,000 thoughts a day and 98% of them we had yesterday. You know another cartoon you see a man on a highway and he's about to enter a desert and the sign says you and your own tedious thoughts next 500 miles. [snorts] Though the key challenge with this ongoing movie um is that because evolution has rigged us to control by being vigilant about potential threats, you know, because we have that negativity bias, most of our thoughts are worry thoughts, judgment, you know, it our thoughts perpetuate an atmosphere of tension and fear. the clutched fist. You know, evolution also rigged us to meet our needs and we get habituated to thoughts about what's missing, what more we want and need. You know, so that's craving and fantasy and that's also the tension of a clutched fist. So the Buddha taught that whatever a person frequently thinks and reflects on that will become the inclination of their mind. So just to consider that you know what kind of thoughts do you frequently think that becomes the inclination of the mind. Neuroscience says it in a similar way that neurons that fire together wire together. You can sense it. Our thinking is habitual. And of course it perpetuates sticky emotional states. I I think often of neuroscientist Jill Bolty Taylor who says that it takes 1.5 minutes for an emotion to move through without the fuel of thoughts. But if we're thinking those incessant thoughts will lock it in so it can become a mood. It's like the story of a little boy who says to his mother, "Mommy, pretend you're surrounded by 10 hungry tigers. What would you do?" She says, "I don't know." And he said, "Stop pretending." So, we live in this mental atmosphere and you know, just like the ego, our thoughts are a good servant. They're not a good master. You know, a good servant, they're essential to human survival, to flourishing. You know, the capacity to think enables us to communicate and treat disease and design buildings, write poetry. Wise contemplation is part of the spiritual path. It turns us towards love, towards the mystery, towards reality. So, this isn't saying thoughts are bad. It's when they're the master. They don't guide us well. You know, our mental maps of the world are often misleading. Our memories faulty. You know, again, that negativity bias. We live with painfully limiting beliefs about ourselves. You know, our thoughts seem to fixate on faults, our own, others. And then, of course, we project, we misinterpret. story from many years ago about a couple that decides to go to Florida to thaw out during a a very icy winter up north. And they're going to stay at the same hotel that they spent their honeymoon at 20 years earlier. But they have these really hectic lives and so they have to fly different days. So the husband leaves on Thursday and the wife follows him down the she's going to follow him down the the day after. He checks into the hotel and there's a computer. So, he decides to send an email to his wife. However, he accidentally left out one letter in her email address and without realizing his error, he sends it off. And meanwhile, somewhere in Houston, a widow has just returned home from her husband's funeral. He was a minister and he was called home to glory following a heart attack. So, the widow decides to check her email and she expects messages from relatives and friends. She reads the first email, screams, and faints. The widow's son rushes into the room, finds his mother on the floor, and sees the computer screen, which reads, "This is what she got to my loving wife. Subject: I've arrived. I know you're surprised to hear from me. They have computers here now, and you're allowed to send emails to your loved ones. I've just arrived and been checked in. I see that everything has been prepared for your arrival tomorrow. Looking forward to seeing you then. Hope your journey is as uneventful as mine was. Sure is hot down here. [clears throat] I love that story. This is many years ago where you have to have a computer in your room, not not an iPhone. [laughter] So, okay. So, here we are using our mental control towers to protect and further ourselves. But when we believe our thoughts, when they're master, we're living in a virtual reality that is shaping directly our life experience. The movie of the mind is keeping us in prison. We're c kept in the sense of a fearful, usually deficient egoic self by our thoughts. a young man uh I was with on he was at a retreat I was teaching. Uh we were talking about this and how his mind was a tyrant and kept giving him messages of what was wrong with him and he was believing them and um he told me he reminded himself of this tiger in the DC zoo. Her name was Moini. She spent many years at the Washington DC National Zoo and for most of the time she was uh housed in this lion's cage, this 12 by 12 cage with iron bars and a cement floor. So Moini would spend her days restlessly pacing back and forth in these cramped quarters. So eventually the biologists and the staff worked together to create this natural habitat for her that covered several acres. It had hills and trees and a pond, variety of vegetation. So, they were really excited uh to release her into her new expansive environment, but it was too late because the tiger immediately sought refuge in a corner of the compound and she lived for the remainder of her life in that corner. She'd be pacing back and forth an area of 12 by 12 ft that became worn bare of grass. You know, it's like the caterpillar that stays in its cocoon, you know, arrested development. When thoughts are the master, when we don't know how to wake up out of thoughts, they control our world and and we're living in a limited world. I think of one of the shaman who wrote, "We maintain our world with our inner dialogue." A person of knowledge is aware that the world will change completely as soon as they stop talking to themselves. [sighs and snorts] As many are aware, learning to let go of thoughts is is a key part of most meditation training, and it's a lifelong process. Um, again, it's better understood as realizing that we're lost in thought. Because in that realizing awareness actually melts the ice cube, allows us to inhabit a larger space. So, so this is the gift of mindfulness, training to recognize thinking, training to open into something larger because in the moment we're mindful of a thought. We're no longer living inside it. It's not the master. We have opened to a larger field. I often think of being in an airplane and you know how when you fly through a cloud for some period of time it can seem like the clouds the whole world and then when you fly out of it there's a larger space. The cloud could be still there but you're aware there's a larger reality. That's the gift of being mindful of thoughts, of being able to let go of being exclusively identified with and lost inside a thought. There are major breakthroughs when people start meditating and training and letting go of thoughts. I mean, the basic realization is I don't have to believe my thoughts. That is powerful. I am not my thoughts. They're not the master anymore. We're not being uh our life isn't being clutched, squeezed. This is uh a reading from Ajin Sumido. He's an American Buddhist monk living in Great Britain. He says the practice of letting go is very effective for minds obsessed by compulsive thinking. You simplify your practice just down to two words letting go. Rather than try to develop this practice and then develop that and achieve this and go into that and understand and read the sutas and study the abidama and learn pi and sanskrit and then majamakaya and pragna paramita. Get ordinations in hinayana, mahayana, vajadriana. write books and become a worldren known authority on Buddhism instead of becoming the world's expert on Buddhism and being invited to great international Buddhist conferences. Just let go, let go, let go. I did nothing but this for two years. Every time I tried to understand or figure out things, I'd say let go, let go until the desire would fade out. So, I'm making it very simple for you to save you from getting caught incredible amounts of suffering. There's nothing more sorrowful than having to attend international Buddhist conferences. Every time you become mindful of thought, letting go into a larger field, perhaps the breath, the senses, it's practicing dying to the limited egoic self. You're undoing the clench, letting go of control. Okay, again, let's pause. Let's pause. Close the eyes or lower the gaze. Feeling the breath. Let go of what has passed. Let go of what may come. Let go of what is happening now. Don't try to figure anything out. Don't try to make anything happen. Relax right now and rest. With even a little bit of letting go, perhaps you can sense what's what's this self here like? What's the sense of my own being? And notice it's not so solid. There's more space. There's more of the mystery shining through. If your eyes are closed again, opening them, if you'd like, you don't have to. So, I want to name it takes practice. It's it is a life practice. Letting go of thoughts are such deep conditioning. And for most the training involves letting go of thoughts and an opening to arrive in the senses. It might be the breath, body, sound. I'm so aware and this is for new but also experienced meditators. It can be discouraging. There can be a lot of self-judgment. I mean, I know so many people have said, "Well, I just have a really busy mind. I'm probably not cut out for this. I'm not doing it right." And I just want to say it's not personal and most of us have busy minds. Thoughts are the primary way we control life. You know our mind secretes thoughts like our body secretes enzymes. We have a default network in our brain which means that when we're not engaged in goal oriented task, the mind is designed to move back and forth between the past and the future and it's trying to reestablish a sense of self of orientation of being able to manage things. I've shared uh that I walk in the woods by the river almost daily and usually my intention is presence to be awake to sound sensations communing with with life and it's so clear especially when I'm stressed the compulsion to think you know it's it's not prot it's not productive it's more kind of this prot protective thinking that gives the illusion of being in control. You know that if if I'm alert and vigilant and preparing for what might go wrong, then I'm safer. It just happens. And the point is not to stop thoughts. We're not trying to get rid of them. That's more ego control. It's simply to become aware to inhabit a space that's larger than the thought that can relate to the thought with some curiosity and kindness and then we get lost again and then we go oh okay thinking thinking and in that noticing there's more awareness there's some space around the thought we're inhabiting a larger space now I want to name that waking up from thoughts becomes more challenging if they're charged thoughts. You know, really strong fears or shame or craving [snorts] and awareness then needs to fully connect with the emotions underneath them. If we don't, they'll just keep circling back into more thinking. So, we have to learn this is going to be the next letting go. We'll explore in the next talk really how to let go of our resistance to feeling feelings so we can move from the sticky charged thoughts into the feelings that we've been avoiding. But the basic waking up from thoughts just getting more and more the knack of just seeing oh thinking and kind of opening up some waking up to that seizeless inner dialogue of commentary and worry and planning it opens the door. It begins this liberating process of letting go into freedom. We manage life with our thoughts. thoughts cover over the mystery. So as we begin to see, oh, thinking thinking, we begin to sense the space between the thoughts, there's a bit more space. We sense the space around the thoughts. It can get to be, and I love this image, that we're in a house with no roof. When it starts getting quiet, we're in a house with no roof. It's you can sense almost that the mind is merging with the sky and we're not living inside the clouds. We're inhabiting the space of the sky. House with no roof. I often uh in addition to that sense being headless. And if that sounds strange to you, I invite you when you're meditating to imagine it in some way that uh above the shoulders there's space. There's no formed head because we're so identified with the head that when you imagine being headless, it dissolves that identification. We expand. This is the poet roomie. Be empty of worrying. Think of who created thought. Why do you stay in prison when the door is so wide open? Move outside the tangle of fear thinking. Live in silence. Flow down and down in always widening rings of being. So friends, we're going to close by practicing a little with thoughts. And um I really invite you as you move through the week to let your intention be just to notice more when thinking is happening and to explore what it's like to notice and open to listen to feel to open to a larger space of being. So for these moments and this will be short just a taste as we've been doing let this be a pause eyes closed or the gaze lowered and again to feel the breath as a way of connecting right here and now. Perhaps a long deep inb breath and a long slow outreath, a nice full deep inb breath and feeling the outreath as letting go. Letting go. Letting go. Breathing in and slow outreath. Letting go relaxing outward releasing. Then as the breath resumes in its natural rhythm, just sense a scanning through the body, noticing whatever might want to let go in this moment. Perhaps tension in the shoulders, softening, dissolving, softening the hands, letting the chest be open and the belly soft. Relaxing down through the whole body. Perhaps opening the attention to also sense sound. So you're listening to and feeling the whole moment right here in your senses. Senses awake. Let this be home base. The only assignment here is when thoughts arise to simply become aware of them. Let the awareness loosen the grip so that you can again listen and feel open to more of it. Spacious sense of being. noticing what's happening inside you. And if there's subtle thought or more of a overt thought just to be aware of it gently opening again listening to sound, feeling sensations, noticing the difference between a thought, virtual reality and the realness, the vividness, the immediacy of presence. Sense if you can notice the space between thoughts. the space around thoughts. Imagining that house without a roof that your mind is free to merge with the sky. Headless. Bound the space of wakefulness. Interior wakefulness. Wakefulness around you. Continuous space filled with the light of awareness. Let go of what is past. Let go of what may come. Let go of what is happening now. Don't try to figure anything out. Don't try to make anything happen. Relax right now and rest. >> [snorts] >> Well, thank you my friends for your presence, for your attention, for your care about waking up. So this week we explored the letting go, the opening beyond thoughts and we will continue uh as we move forward uh the other dimensions of letting go uh deepening that taste of homecoming. Blessings and love to each >> [music] [music]

Namaste. Welcome friends. I've been choosing themes as we enter this new year that I hope feel very alive for for you as you move through your personal experience and also the sense of the collective. So last week and this week has been on letting go of control. uh understanding that controlling is a survival brain strategy and the more threatened we feel the more vigorously we try to control our lives and it can be like um struggling in quicksand you know that we sink the more we struggle the more we sink into suffering really so globally insecurity and fear is really spiking and societies around the globe are trending ing towards more controlling, more authoritarianism. Uh it's kind of a violent controlling that perceives inner enemies like immigrants or people of color and outer enemies. And we're witnessing the horror of this currently. Uh really cruelty towards those most vulnerable. Individually, when we're threatened, we also try to control inner parts of ourselves um that we mistrust. And we do it by shaming and blaming and we try to control others. So whether we look at it from an individual lens or collective uh controlling is not a recipe for happiness, for intimacy, for presence, for peace, for freedom. There's a a dowist story. A master archer hits the target effortlessly until he's told that his life depends on his shot. Then his hands begin to shake and he misses. And the dowist master says, "You still know how to shoot. You have just let the idea of control replace the natural flow." Controlling is a primitive strategy. It's natural that it arises and part of our evolutionary capacity is to see when it doesn't serve. So for each of us, we know how to live. We know that a wise letting go of control can free us, can open us to our natural flow of wisdom, creativity, and love. And it takes practice. It takes deepening attention to this domain. So I'm hoping friends that this talk and these reflections will serve your heart and your spirit. I'd like to begin with a personal sharing that after recording part one and then midway in the midst of composing this talk um I got an 8week old puppy and you know as many of you know a bundle of pee and joy you know so um my computer has kind of been set up right near the puppy play area and of course I'm having to race out every half hour to make sure she doesn't pee inside. My approach to having out to working basically has been fragmented and composing a talk. It's another world. So I have this real ego attachment to my process and what I'm just discovering. I'm so attached to having my quiet space to really immerse and and sense what feels important to say and I'm much more scattered. So, I felt this real um agitation wanting my quiet space, fearing that I wouldn't come through, fearing that in some way, you know, I'd fall short. And it's been an amazing time just to practice letting go, you know, over and over again, letting go for this last week into the flow of her biology, her moods, um, and making peace with imperfection. So, um, classic story that many of you might be familiar with where a man chase is chased by a tiger and he jumps off the edge of a cliff hanging by the root of a tree and, you know, tiger's pacing above and ragged cliffs below. And he yells out, "Help." And, you know, hears a booming voice. Yes. Says, "God, God, is that you?" "Yes." Well, help. The God says, "Just let go." And the man says, "Is anybody else there?" And we know that from the ego's perspective, the last thing we want to do is to release the grip, to let go. It's core conditioning that like all living creatures in the face of fear we hold on tight to whatever we think will protect us from loss and from death. Controlling comes from feeling threatened. And while you know certainly we're trying to protect ourselves from physical death a lot of the time we're trying to protect ourselves it's really protecting ourselves from ego death you know from being rejected from being judged like me in this talk from falling short in some way. You know, I think of Anthony Dlo who says that enlightenment is absolute cooperation with the inevitable. It's about surrendering and letting go of the resistance to the small and large losses and deaths. And of course, we are totally rigged to control. In another story, a man writes that he had recently uh picked a new primary care doctor and he has two visits. All these lab tests come back and his doctor says, "Well, you're doing fairly well for a person of your age." And this guy gets really upset. He's, you know, so they have this conversation about it. And so he says, "Well, do you think I'll live to be a hundred?" And the doctor asks him some questions. He says, "Well, do you smoke, you know, tobacco or drink beer or wine or hard liquor?" And man says, "Oh, no." You know, and I'm not doing pot or psychedelics either. Um, then the doctor says, "Well, do you eat sweets, desserts?" Guy says, "Not at all. I've read about how how bad sugar is for you." Well, do you spend a lot of time in the sun, like playing golf or boating, sailing, hiking, bicycling? Nope. Hope I don't I'm not risking, you know, skin cancer. And doctor said, "Do you do intense sports? You know, drive fast cars or have a lot of sex?" "No," says the man. The doctor just looks at him and says, "Well, why do you even give a damn?" And the problem is that while controlling in some domains is absolutely necessary for survival, when we over control, it's not the recipe for flourishing. And as we explored in the last talk on letting go, we get habituated to controlling our lives, to controlling ourselves, to controlling others, you know, defending, judging, planning, worrying. And that overcontrolling causes suffering. You probably know your favorite control strategies. You know, ways of controlling really define our personality and our sense of self. I mean, for me, when I'm anxious and I go into control mode, it comes out being bossy or, you know, going getting lost in planning, fixating on getting things done. For some people, it's being dominating. For others, it's being accommodating when they're trying to control by protecting. For some, it's chronic worry. For some, it's judgment. For many of us, it's a whole grouping of them. So, the moments when we react to fear by going into our favorite control modes, in those moments, we disconnect from our body. We're lost in and believing our thoughts. Our thoughts are primarily fear-based. So the whole background mood in our body mind is is anxiety. And in our world, it blocks intimacy. I mean, we can't really be intimate with ourselves or others when we're in control mode. It blocks the felt sense of love, you know, blocks creativity. controlling obscures a deeper truth of who we are. So if we enlarge this and look at the broader society, societies that are really characterized by fear-based controlling, you know, it's reflected in religious institutions in in education, which is, you know, becomes very narrow and rigid. um in the type of ethics that are adopted with others and relating to ourselves, it becomes confusing and difficult to sense really an ethical guide. One man, uh Butch Hancock says he remembers growing up in a small conservative town. He says it taught me two things. One is that God loves you and you're going to burn in hell. And the other is that sex is the most awful, filthy thing on earth. and you should save it for someone you love. Okay. So, the challenge of rigidity of societies that are fear-based, the big one we know um is that they tend towards fascism, oppression, and war. So while the conditioning to control is part of our evolutionary story, we are homo sapiens, which means beings that are aware. And that awareness by nature is capable of seeing how the controlling causes suffering and of enabling us to wake up and relax the grip to become more collaborative, conscious, openhearted beings. And that is the hope and the trajectory of humans. And awareness is our superpower. Awareness allows us to see what's going on. It allows us to see, oh, fear and this reaction to fear makes me small. And then it allows us to face fear with more presence. And then rather than controlling to kind of loosen our resistance and feel our feelings and as one teacher put it to meet our edge and soften. When we do that when instead of control we become present. It opens us to the loving awareness that is our true home. So it feels like one of the most deep and important inquiries on a spiritual path and also for society to look at is how do we relate to our fears of change, of loss, of dying? Do we reflexively tighten and go into control mode? Or is there some capacity to deepen presence to let go of controlling and to awaken through our fear to a larger presence and truth? For one woman uh when her mother told her that she had breast cancer, she felt this huge swirl of emotions, you know, sadness, guilt, anger, regret. But then immediately her mind went into planning. She's asking herself what needs to happen, what are your treatment options? How soon can we get the lump removed? That kind of thing. And then she writes this. She said, "Thank God for this meditation practice because she was able to pause and say, "What am I noticing right now?" Awareness, coming back to presence. And in that presence, just being with the swirl of emotion, she was able to also attune to her mother who didn't want to talk and didn't want to plan. She was scared, and her mother needed to be scared. So, this woman writes, "I debated whether to give her a hug, which sounds terrible, I know, but I was barely holding it together and scurrying around and making dinner and pouring over doctor paperwork, doctor's paperwork, and staying busy. This was my way of avoiding a total collapse. Being present, letting go of that controlling allowed me to shift to her way. I took a breath, walked across the room, and wrapped my arms around her. It was an awkward sideways hug, but it was also a long necessary one. And then something happened. Slowly, she started rocking side to side like a mother rocks a child, except the child was now the caretaker. It was a sweet, tiny moment I'll never forget. The one that I surely would have missed were it not for the power of mindfulness, of awareness, letting go of controlling, being here. When we look back at our lives, how many moments do we wish that we had that presence that instead of controlling and reacting, we could pause and say, "What's happening?" That we could let go of our busy thoughts. That we could feel our feelings. That we could feel our hearts. That we could attune. Controlling creates separation. Letting go, letting be connects. This is our theme. You'll hear it over and over. So, humans have had to deal with the consciousness of change, of our inevitable death through millennia. So, they've had to deal with this reflex to control. So for me it's helpful to see these two basic ways humans respond to fear of death and loss from a historical perspective. You know whether going into controlling or deepening presence because it reveals the relative health or suffering of society and it can be a guide for our present world. So I want to ask you to join me for a few moments. We're going to go back thousands of years in time. Many are familiar with the Greek myth of Pphanie. Okay. So, she was the daughter of Zeus and Deer, the goddess of the crops. And Pluto, who was the king of the underworld, abducted Pphanany. She was picking flowers in a meadow. And her mother in her great grief ceases to care for the world. So, the crops all wither, the earth goes barren. Zeus agrees to help get Praphanie back, but it's a compromise. She gets to be on Earth for half the year and in the underworld for the other half. And so like like all good myths, it offers some reflection of reality. In this case, the naturalness, you know, really allowing, accepting, opening to the naturalness of the cycles of birth, death, and renewal. It's a way of relate to change. So this myth life, death, renewal became the foundation of what are called the Lucian mysteries which are the most famous and revered religious rituals from ancient from the ancient Greek world. People would would come from far and wide each year to participate and they took place in Lucius which is located about 11 miles northwest of Athens. These mystery rights lasted over 2,000 years. I mean, just think of that. That's as long as Christianity. They drew people from all over. Many well-known participants, people you've heard of, famous Greek philosophers. Plato referred to the experience of participating in the mystery rights as blessed sight and vision in a state of perfection. Aristotle said that initiates came to elucidus not to learn something but to experience something direct transformation. I'll read you something from Cicero the Roman statesman and philosopher. He said on the Lucian mysteries for it appears to me that among the many exceptional and divine things your Athens has produced and contributed to human life nothing is better than those mysteries. For by means of them we have transformed from a rough and savage way of life to the state of humanity and have been civilized. Just as they are called initiations, so in actual fact have we have learned from them the fundamentals of life and have grasped the basis not only for living with joy but also for dying with a better hope. 300 years later Marcus Aurelius sec this is 2 century AD now his emperor of Rome he called he was called the philosopher he was initiated into the mysteries and he was also key in rebuilding after the site had some destruction so it's really interesting what drew all these people uh known and unknown women and men privileged slaves The mystery rights were said to give initiates the experience of facing and transcending their fear of death. Facing and transcending their fear of death and opening directly into the mysteries of existence, experiencing spiritual awakening, a sense of connection to the divine. people were drawn for those inner experiences and for the deep bonds then that emerged with others. And so it's interesting to sense what was going on in those mystery rights that allowed for this profound spiritual awakening. And here's where we come to our theme that we're exploring is that the mystery rights allowed participants to transcend the controlling ego to deepen presence. Real surrendering and letting go. Here's what we know about them. That people would prepare for many months. There was a long walk there in the natural world. There was fasting. There were rights. It was all conducted by women and then they would drink the sacred ka. I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing that right. It's spelled k y k e o n which is a beer that's made from barley and it contains psychoactive substances which is a fungus that LSD comes from. And they do these ceremonies with a dramatic reenactment of the myth you know birth, death, renewal and in that way face their fears of dying. So here they were you know fasting and contemplating and doing psychoactive uh plants medicines and here they are. um it formed the roots of Greek philosophy with Aristotle, Plato, Cicero as I mentioned and also the early Christian church. So I'm speaking of this because we are already very familiar many are aware that around the globe uh sacred rights have been done by so many indigenous cultures and they've included these kind of elements of the sacred medicines the psychoactive substances the chanting the rituals for a direct mystical experience a letting go of the ego and a transcendence. We know that. And to me, it's so powerful and so fascinating to sense how this longing to be able to let go and open beyond ego. This longing to realize transcendence has lived in homo sapiens around the globe. It's so interesting to sense the power of that. And also interesting to then follow on and sense how was it suppressed. Here's the story historically in the 4th century Theodosius who was the Christian emperor wiped out the mystery cults and any participation of women just wiped it out. It was all in very in a short period of time. um that included wiping out the use of the psychoactive uh it they were using also in the Dionine right psychoactive wine. It became regular wine though it was still called the blood of Christ. So then we might wonder why was it all wiped out and why am I going into all of this? Well, for the controlling ego, for the shadow masculine, the mystery cults, the nature practices were a threat. That's why the Roman emperor wiped them out. I mean, why would the church target and demonize and demean women as witches, attack the natural healers, attack indigenous practices because they're threats to the controlling ego. Martin Luther pointed this out centuries later. He said that the direct access to the mystical, which was what the mystery rights were all about, meant no power to the middleman. The Christian church was built upon powerful men as intercessors. This is the controlling ego. So followers had to rely on their words and concepts rather than direct experience. This is Alan Watts. He says, "Nothing could be more alarming to the ecclesiastical hierarchy than a popular outbreak of mysticism. For this might well amount to setting up a democracy in the kingdom of heaven. So as we know well over these last centuries uh the shadow masculine the controlling ego has been at the helm and this control mode has extended to colonizing to oppression to genocide of many indigenous cultures to controlling the earth as a resource. And for humans, it's led to a real disconnection from the natural world and from spirit. The controlling ego has led to destroying the earth and creating huge divides with each other. Because here's the thing. A society that does not encourage connecting to body, to heart, to spirit in direct ways, a society that fails to incorporate mystical experience is flawed. It has disease. Yates at the end of World War I wrote in the second coming these words that just keep coming back to me over and over again. The center cannot hold. Many have felt that in recent days. And something in us knows that without direct experience of the sacredness of life, the sacred feminine, we become physically, mentally, and spiritually ill. And the forces that cut us off are especially strong in patriarchal societies with rigid dominance hierarchies um in industrialized militarized societies. So after Yates, 10 years after Yates, DH Lawrence wrote this and it's one of the verses that stays with me. He said, "It is a question practically of relationship. We must get back into relation, vivid and nourishing relation to the cosmos and the universe. Vitally the human race is dying. It is like a great uprooted tree with its roots in the air. We must plant ourselves again in the universe. I love that that line. We must plant ourselves again in the universe. So friends, I I took time with the historical perspective because you can kind of get the sense of the mystical roots that were so nourishing through these mystery rights, through the uh practices and teachings of indigenous cultures and the kind of uprootedness that has come about over last centuries with the more dominance of a controlling ego. And it shines a light on our current suffering and also on what's needed to reconnect. You know, I think of our our current global challenges and trauma as severed belonging, you know, and it's a call to awaken awareness to replant in the universe, a call for deepening presence, for letting go, letting go of the controlling ego and letting go into our bodies, the natural world, spirit. My sense is that many of us are feeling that calling, feeling that longing to awaken beyond ego um to touch the mystery. And while you might be listening right in these moments for different reasons, this longing is in us. We know that. So along with our growing crisis of severed belonging, we're also witnessing a growing access to pathways of letting go, pathways of reconnecting. We can see it in the many forms of meditation and yoga increasingly mainstreamed. We can see it also in the resurfacing of plant medicines. Um, it's so interesting that research shows similar pathways of impact with meditation and plant medicines. Both allowing and helping us to do the letting go that frees us. Both having the capacity to quiet the conceptual mind. Quiet the parts of the brain that keep filtering by separating and cataloging and naming and judging. Joseph Campbell talks about releasing the masks of God. Those are the masks of God. The mental activity, the plant medicines and meditation both help dissolve a kind of solidity of sensing of a separate self. Um sometimes described as a dying of the exclusive identity with ego. Dying while yet alive. allowing this realization of beingness of that sacred formless timeless presence beyond our changing thoughts and forms. Dying while yet alive and plant medicines are most impactful when they are combined with practicing meditation. I mean, I know people who have been uh they see a year to live with cancer and psychedelics allowed them to open to their fears rather than trying to control open to their fears and live so many precious moments because they accessed and trusted in a larger belonging. I know people who've been facing trauma, all sorts of childhood traumas and the combination of doing psychedelic medicines and and uh meditations allowed for profound healing again sensing of who they are beyond the scared self. Many of you have heard of Roland Griffith who's a friend and a pioneer in the field of psychedelics. um his final study which is soon to be published hasn't quite come out yet. He um had a group of leaders for many world religions and they all uh did plant medicines and each claimed it was one of the most meaningful experiences in their life. It deepened their direct realization in their own particular faith and enhanced their work as a minister, as a leader. And on my own path, it was psychedelics that first gave me a taste of what's beyond ego, beyond sense of separation. I remember the first time I had a Aurelia, a plant in my room that's just like this one here actually, which is part of maybe why I love it. my version of the bodhic tree, you know, and I realized that the same life consciousness animating this form of this plant is the same that's animating this form here, this body and all life. And that pure loving awareness was more true than any story about myself. And then in another early experience with psychedelics which was more challenging I realized that this separate self form or entity is impermanent will die and really opening to that core fear lot like the mysteries the elucian mysteries but not having resistance really opening and discovering how awareness could permeate the fear how it was interior to the fear until the whole universe was this vibrating energy filled with light and tenderness. There was no one home. By opening to fear, not resisting, I opened to a sense of being beyond that separate self. And I'll share with you, I haven't shared this before, but I was sitting very still after that for a long time. I had some clay and I shaped a Buddha. had that had no real experience with anything to do with Buddhism, but I shaped a Buddha and afterwards uh I was inspired to go to yoga and meditation classes and found that those practices serve the very same taste of freedom in a and yet in a in a more integrated way. So for those wondering um you know my current life psychedelics the use of psychedelics is very infrequent. I kind of consider it as mentioned it's kind of a reboot of surrendering and opening to the mystery. Um and meditation in a daily and ongoing informal way is what keeps on waking up beyond ego. Okay. For the remainder of this talk, we'll we'll look directly at the letting goes that offer this freedom. In the first session on letting go, we looked at thoughts. And it's so crucial to train oursel to release the grip of thoughts, the trance of thinking. It's the first step of replanting in the universe. It's the first step if we want to open into the body and the heart and the spirit. And if you missed this part one, I encourage you to listen for this session. We'll look at the other letting goes. Letting go of resistance to feelings. Letting go of the armoring around the heart. Letting go into awareness with feelings. The shadow ego, the controlling ego in all of us does not want to enter the wild uncontrollable realm of the body. It's habit is to resist, you know, to try to control and stay in thoughts. So, training and letting go of the resistance to feelings begins with that simple question, what am I unwilling to feel? Just being curious. And then we can start to attend to the body and undo that resistance. It's radical to feel our feelings. You might reflect, and we've done this before, just clenching your fist and feel the clenched fist. And this is like resisting, resisting, resisting. Just feel the squeeze, the tension. And now let awareness naturally grow both around the fist, penetrating into the fist, feeling awareness from the inside out of the fist. And as you let awareness grow, just sense a natural undoing of the clenching. Just awareness alone, softening. So it's not like you're doing something with letting go. You're undoing the clench. And awareness is what's undoing it. And notice how as you soften, it gives access to feelings inside and out. Opening to our body is a process of awareness. Awareness will relax the resistance. It will help us connect with the aliveness. Another way of saying this is that letting go of resistance is like saying yes to life. Now the supports for letting go, it's attitude that we're curious. So what am I unwilling to feel? that we're gentle, that we're friendly. It helps to to name what we're aware of, clenching, tightness, tension. Brings the attention more to it. It helps to breathe. You might feel a sense of a long outreath as you feel and feel and feel what's there. But the key is to let awareness infuse the experience. And of course, I want to bring in the reminder that whenever there's trauma, it's a gradual letting go. First establishing safety, some sense of resilience, and then very much at your own pace, paying good attention to yourself, beginning to lean in. So, another brief reflection of letting go into the body. like to invite you to pause and sense a recent situation that triggered you. Maybe a five out of a ten might have been making you anxious, irritated, angry. And bring yourself to that situation. Just notice what's going on. Go to where it's intense and see if you can let go of thoughts and find the roots in the body where the sensations and feelings the strongest. scanning your throat, your chest, your belly. Maybe putting your hand where you feel strong feelings and breathe with it. Maybe a short inb breath and then a long outreath. Feeling the feelings. Breathing with them. Let awareness diffuse them. So you can feel the awareness around permeating from the interior. relaxing the clench of resistance, healing feelings, noticing if there's anything between you and intimacy with this experience. And maybe you're sensing aversion to the unpleasantness. Not to judge, simply offer presence to the experience of aversion, not resisting it, not making it wrong. And you might find perhaps a growing sense of space for what is because letting go of resistance leads to letting be a kind of yes to whatever is in the body. And you might sense if the yes is full and just explore that that kind of deep surrendering to say yes to what's here. Who are you? Who are you? If there's no resistance, if there's a yes to life, who are you? Take a full deep breath. And if your eyes are closed, open your eyes. Now, some might have sensed that there really was no resistance. And there was yes and maybe not such a sense of a solid separate self. More of a field presence. Maybe more of that mystery and openness. Maybe compassion. Others might have noticed a pulling back, not a full letting go. And that's totally fine because this is a life practice. Whatever you practice goes stronger. And the more you sense the freedom of letting go, the more you'll naturally remember and go, "Oh, okay. Let go of the thoughts. Feel the feelings. Be here." Okay. So, the first letting go is letting go of the thoughts and stories. The second is letting go of resistance, feeling your feelings. Often what supports letting go into the body and what deepens a full letting go into reality is letting go into love. Love heals fear. Love removes the feelings of separation that keep us clenching. And because we've been wounded and we have pain around relationships, we have huge conditioning not to let in love, to hold back from opening to love. In the deepest ways, letting go into love is like dying to the small separate self. It's it can be felt a lot of vulnerability when we start opening to love. And yet, if we're willing, what we discover is this field of loving that is has no division and allows us to have a fearless heart. So, it's a process. And every time you tend towards feelings of connectedness, every time you practice dying to separation, you're undoing the clench. Franco Sesci who's a dear friend and the founder of Zen Hospice was very close to one man he was accompanying uh before his death the man had stomach cancer and a lot of pain and he asked Frank to guide him in meditation. So Frank began but soon the man told him it was really too painful to meditate with. So Frank offered to place his hands on the man's belly to help hold the pain. And the man agreed, but he said, "Yeah, it still hurts." So Frank put his hands a little bit away from the man's belly and said, "How's that? Little better." He put his hands a little bit further from the man's belly and the man said, "Oh, that's lovely." And Frank invited him to rest there for a little bit. And the man said, "Just rest in love. rest in love because that's what he was experiencing. And from then on, you know, he'd have a lot of pain. They'd push the morphine pump. He'd say to himself, "Rest in love. Rest in love." Because he couldn't penetrate into direct sensations. He couldn't will into that, but he could find space around it, the space of loving. And his relationship to the pain shifted just the way our relationship to the ego shifts when we bring loving presence. In this in this situation, his wife, the man's wife came in the next day and she was very anxious about his dying. And he looked at her and he said, "Rest in love." because it works for all fears to feel this life and to feel the ocean of loving that it belongs to. I love that mantra. Rest in love. Love undoes the armoring. Love undoes the armoring. So in any moment that you let in love, that you offer yourself kindness, that you have the intention even to be kind or that you offer love to another, you're relaxing the armoring. It's letting go. There's a a dying to the separate self and an opening to that unified field of loving to a heart as wide as the world. So let's just do a brief taste of this of letting go into loving presence. This is a simple practice. It was inspired by the desert mothers and fathers. So um just background many of the desert mothers and fathers had described prayer as bringing your thinking down into your heart. And this is actually the practice letting go of thought and letting go into heart space. So, and it by and I and I found this and adapted it from a meditation led by Richard Roar. Okay. So, again, take a pause and this time allow a difficult situation with another person in your life to come to mind where there's some negativity or irritation towards them in your mind or you feel some separation. Now bring attention to your heart. You might imagine just feel a smile. Imagine and sense a smile spreading through your heart. So that you can sense a bit of heart space with some light there. and letting go of the thoughts about this person. Just sense that you're bringing this person into your heart space. Just imagine and sense that that it's your intention to let go of thoughts and simply bring this person energetically, the felt sense of this person into your heart space. Notice what happens. Perhaps you can notice that thoughts and stories reinforce separations, protective armoring. They're part of our controlling ego. In the heart, you can sense a space of aliveness, presence, warmth, sensitivity. When you're fully inhabiting heart space, when you're letting go into love, it's difficult to judge, to create the story line. Instead, you're in an enlarged space of being, embodied, awake, tender, and present. So perhaps in the days and weeks to come when you're having difficulty with another, when you're in some form of control mode, you can let go of thoughts and just gently explore bringing them from your mind into heart space with the intention towards kindness and noticing just what happens. Okay. again. Come on back. If your eyes are closed, open them. So, taken together, letting go of the story, letting go of resistance to feelings, letting go into love, they offer us a path of true presence. And it's not abstract. Increasingly, we can apply in daily life. So, I shared how this week it's been good practice letting go into the flow with a puppy. you know, relaxing that clench fist of trying to do more and having certain outcomes. Just pausing, breathing, feeling, letting be yes to what is. And I would call this a very modest level of difficulty in terms of dying to the controlling self. A puppy's, you know, pretty pretty much oxytocin flowing, but still letting go. The more challenging practice is when the controlling ego is operating off of very charged wants and fears. When there's a real suffering of not letting go, we can kind of see it. And a story that gives you more of a sense of that is um a few years back I was working on a project with a group of people and I received an email from one uh that was the whole group was CCD and it was framed as trying to be helpful and it was very disparaging of me of my uh role in terms of social in social causes and and how I used my voice and I knew there were some good points to pay attention to, some truths to learn from, there always are. And so, while I'm usually open to feedback and I want to learn, this was delivered with um a good good amount of animosity. And so, my mind knew that, you know, that it would that that was coming from the person's own suffering, but it didn't matter. I was I felt bothered. I felt misunderstood. I felt embarrassed by such a public attack. And um so I could feel that clutch fist of my ego and I found myself constantly writing email responses defending my views and my actions. Um usually happen between 2 and 3:00 a.m. I'm sure you're familiar. So I began to practice these different pathways of letting go. First I asked myself, what am I thinking and what am I believing? And I was believing there must be something bad about me to draw out such a charged attack and I was also believing others are going to think less of me my reputation and thoughts kept circling you know so there were many rounds of just let go of the thoughts come into the body let go of the thoughts come into the body and then in the body what am I unwilling to feel I hope this is sounding familiar again these are the inquiries that help to serve letting Oh, okay. Anger and the feeling that I should be above this. I should be able to let go of the anger, embarrassment, shame. So, I kept opening to that, you know, as I often do, put my hand on my heart, breathing with it, letting awareness sink into it, permeate it. And then another question, can I meet this with care? And I imagined and felt love pouring in through my hand again. uh just bathing the feelings with love. Like the pain was cradled in an ocean of caring and I often will say rest in love. Rest in love and there was a lot of quieting a lot of uh there was no controlling just a a quieting and a sense of a loving presence that was more truly who I am than the injured ego that had a control. So this is an inner dying to a limit itself remembering a larger truth and many rounds. I also knew I needed to respond to the situation. So my question there for myself is what is love asking for me? My controlling ego's strategy was to ignore the email, not respond. Um but I reread it carefully and I found something useful that I could learn from. I wrote a short note kind of thanking and honoring that this person cared deeply or wouldn't have reached out and I acknowledged that it was difficult for me to receive and I appreciated what I learned and that helped me find even more freedom. It it deepened the sense of dying to kind of ego and reputation and and inhabiting a larger space. Also, it gave me a kind of genuine capacity to see the other suffering, not just mental, but just to feel that, to appreciate their hearts. Now, if I'm making this sound easy, I apologize because it wasn't. It took a while. And here's an important piece. I really had to let go of the idea that this shouldn't be happening, that I shouldn't be reacting, that I should let go. Because the ego can't let go. We can't will letting go of control. We can only be willing to be present with what's happening. And that is the root of letting go. It's the presence, the awareness that naturally releases the clench. Again, letting go arises naturally from full presence. Full presence is what's arising. So the sooner we remember like that woman who was with her mother her mother had the diagnosis of cancer and she remembered oh what am I noticing right now can I be with this that's when there was some of that surrendering of the clench so it takes patience because while we can't will it we can feel our longing to let go and that increases presence Friends, this is intrinsically a path of surrender, of undoing, of releasing and it can go very deep. We can be surrendering the surrendering really trusting awareness itself will dissolve the tight identities that we live in in an organic way. And trusting this is key because what we long for is always and already here. The releasing of control in no way means we're inactive. You know, ego is a terrible master, but it's a great servant. And the possibility is that our activity arise from openness, that it's guided from caring, that it's filled with creativity. And and then our ego is guided by that. and our activity can actually express who we are. I think again of that woman with her mom who had cancer that after she let go of all her controlling, her planning, her busyiness, she naturally attuned to her mom and that hug will be with her probably for the rest of her life. For me, when I could let go of all the controlling and just be with what was there, I was then able to respond. I could act but in a much less defensive, more openhearted way. So I want to close by saying that the path of letting go and letting be it it's a life path and every day it's natural to get caught in overcontrolling and tensioning up and ruminating and planning and worrying. Not to judge, not to think it should be different. The path is forgetting and remembering and we'll notice because we care about noticing. And then we can pause and do just as we've been talking about. Okay, let's let go of thoughts. Let's feel the feelings. Let's meet our edge and soften soften the heart. And then the gift, the gift of letting go and let letting be, which is the same gift found by indigenous people around the world, the same gift found over those 2,000 years of the mystery rights, the Illusian mysteries. The gift is an awakening beyond ego. It's a homecoming to the truth, to the love, the spirit that expresses who we really are. Okay, let's close. In this final practice, in this practice, we'll explore the key domains of letting go, letting go of thoughts, of resistance to feelings, letting go into love, letting go into awareness. And I encourage you to explore on your own each of these letting goes and all of them. So in these moments allow yourself to arrive. You might take a few long deep breaths. Become aware of your senses. Listening to the sounds that are here. Listening to and feeling the aliveness in the body. Feeling whatever mood is in your heart. And for these next moments continuing in awareness and when thoughts arise just simply let go and reopen the attention to the senses. You might imagine that there's no roof on your head, that the mind is merged with space. sense the space between thoughts. The experience of your being when not lost in thought. aware of sound, sensation, and you might ask yourself, is there anything I'm unwilling to feel? Bringing a gentle, intimate presence into the body, seeing how fully you can relax with open to the life in the body. We unclutch. We let go of resistance by awakening awareness in the body. We let go of the armoring around the heart by offering kindness to what's here. Perhaps you can put your hand on your heart and just imagine opening to the love that's around you. That's through your body. This interior warmth, light permeating, filling. Just sense that resting in love. No resistance. Yes to love. Sense the experience of your being when resting in love undivided the field of loving. And in these final moments, let your intention be the letting go of any controlling to let life be as it is. This is the pure heart of meditation. Letting life be as it is. Resting in and as awareness itself. sensing the mystery that's here. formless, timeless. The field of beingness that's naturally open and awake and tender. Controlling separates, letting go, letting be reveals our innate belonging. This mystery, this freedom, that's our very source. As you feel ready, you might again take a few breaths consciously. Just feel your intention, your aspiration, your longing to remember, to let go, to let be. And thank you friends. Thank you for being part of this. Thank you for your good hearts. Thank you for what you bring to this world. Much love.

How to sell without force or chase

By Joe Hudson

Executive Coach
The Founder Who Hated Selling

A founder I worked with years ago told me that he hated selling his team. Board meetings were easy for him. Even investor pitches were fine.  

But the moment he had to "sell" his own team on a new direction, something tightened in him. He'd over-explain, talk too fast, and push too hard for agreement. And the more he pushed, the more the room pulled back.  

One day, after watching another meeting derail, I asked him what he was trying to avoid. He said, "I don't want them to think I'm trying to control them." He paused. The irony was clear even to him. Trying to get his team to think anything about him was a form of control.  
You're always selling, whether you own it or not

People often think of selling as a "necessary evil," but if you really understand it, it's just an extension of who you are.

In fact, you're always selling. Especially as a leader, whether you want to admit it or not. You want people to...

    Respect each other

    Be in alignment

    Trust each other

    Understand your vision.

Force ≠ Selling. Chase ≠ Selling

What feels terrible about selling is when you're trying to force people into an outcome. And that's when things go sideways:.

    A contract that is created by force often goes south.

    People who feel forced often become passive aggressive.

    Customers who feel cajoled often become dissatisfied and speak poorly about your company.

Trying to force or chase people is what most people call "selling," but it's just a disguised fear of being dismissed, misunderstood, or rejected. It's also the easiest way to see if fear is in the picture (whenever you're using force or chase to convince people). That never feels good, and never pays off in the long run.
Experiment

Look back on your week and find one place where you were using force or chase to convince somebody of something. Then, ask that person what would be required for them to be excited for the outcome that you want.
Example:

    You notice that you were trying to force a customer to buy your lampshades.

    Call up that customer and ask them: "What would make them excited to buy your lampshades?"
