One of the things that I see so many people inflicted by that causes so much pain is the chase for approval. Trying to get people to say, "Okay, you're good enough." And what I notice about those people or when all of us are doing that, what we're doing is we're not actually letting the compliments in. We're not actually accepting the approval that we're getting. As a matter of fact, what most of us do is we push that away. We push that appreciation. We push those compliments and we just say, "No, no, no, that can't be true." And you do it maybe like a ton of different ways. Maybe one way you do it is, "Oh, no, the dress isn't that nice." Or maybe another way that you do it is you just go, "Uh-huh. Yeah." But in your mind, you're like, "Oh, they don't really know me." Or maybe you're just like very direct with it and you're like, "Oh, that person's just trying to sell me something or they want something from me." So, there's a thousand ways where we don't let the compliment in. And even if we do let it in, maybe we only let it in a little bit. We don't actually allow it to move all the way through us and really digest it, really appreciate it. Go, "Oh, wow. That feels really good." Allow ourselves to feel really good inside of the compliment. And because of that, we're not actually ever digesting the compliment. And so, we're constantly hungry for it. We're constantly looking for the approval, but then we get it. We call the person basically essentially a liar. We're like, "Yeah, no, no, you don't understand. You don't know." So, either ignorant or a liar. And then we wonder why we're not getting appreciation, why we're not getting the compliments. Can you imagine? You give somebody a compliment. As a matter of fact, I don't think you have to imagine. You give somebody a compliment and they're like, "No." Like, how much do you want to give them a compliment again? How much are you like, "Oh, yeah, that's cool. Let me do that every day where that person tells me I don't know what I'm talking about and I don't know them." somehow creates some separation between me and them because I gave them a compliment. I'm going to go do that again tomorrow. All the while that person is wanting my approval, but when then they get it, they reject it. They make me feel bad. And so that's what makes this so interesting is that the thing that we want most, we want the approval, we want the gratitude, we want the appreciation, but then when we get it, we're often rejecting it. And so people don't give it to us. And so the question is what makes that the case? We define ourselves as much by what we don't do, what we aren't as what we are. So if somebody's like, "No, no, I'm an expert. I understand. You don't know what you're talking about because I'm an expert." We call that ego because that is some sort of self- definitionf. But the other way to think about it is no, no, no, I could never know that. I'm not good enough. I I'm not good at those things. That's also ego. That's also saying I'm defined myself as this way. We like to have an idea that we're something from today to tomorrow to the next day. We like this idea that there's something solid that we get to hold on to and that people like or dislike or people want or don't want around. But the truth is that we're different all the time. I'm one way with you. I'm a different way with this person. I'm a different way with my wife. I'm a different way with my kids. that can't particularly be helped. We are different people as we age, as our hormones change, as thoughts come and go, we're different. But we like to think that we're solid. And if somebody challenges that, we get a little we get a little testy. Somebody says, "You don't know what you're talking about." "Oh, wait, hold on." Or, "No, you're really, really good at that thing that you think you're bad at." "Oh, no, I'm not." Notice they're both resisted. We're resisting the way that we think about ourselves almost immediately and yet we're still seeking that approval. But what that approval really means is that we're going to be asked to be a little bigger than we are currently. If all of a sudden I can't believe that I'm crappy at math, well that means I might be good at it. Means that maybe if I tried I would really understand and learn math. Now maybe I have to learn math. I don't want to learn math. I'm bad at math. Right? Or, oh, wow, you're a really caring husband. No, no. You know, I'm I'm an average husband. That might be a responsibility. That might be something that I have to take on that I don't particularly want to take on. One of the reasons that we do not like the challenge to our ego or our self-defin is that it might make us look at what we actually are. Right? And if you think about what you are, it must be the thing that you've always been. It must be the thing that you were when you were 2 years old, when you were 6 months old, that you are today, and that you've always been. No matter what anybody said to you, no matter what anybody did, no matter what trauma happened to you, there's been something that's always been there that's got to be you. So, it can't be an emotion. It can't be something that's come and gone, sadness. It can't be a role. mother, nurse, CEO, those all come and go. That can't be you. You weren't a CEO when you were five or when you were eight. And then you can say, well, it must be a caricature like ambition, but ambition went away. Like, I'm an extremely ambitious person, but I haven't been my entire life. You might be an extremely sad person, but there's been a moment where you haven't been sad. And so we have to start really looking at what we are essentially if we look past that ego. And that's scary. That often feels like a deep abyss for people to really look at. Oh wait, wait a second. What I am is something that my mind can't describe. What I am is something that I don't have to defend because it's always there. It's never been changed. It's never been hurt. And that is a scary feeling for a lot of people, at least when they first see it. It's like an abyss opening up. And so that's a lot of what's happening in the compliments is that if you really let the compliment in, if you really feel that appreciation, you get in touch with that big spacious emptiness that's there. You get in touch with the thing that can't be touched. No matter how much you try to annihilate it or how much you compliment it, that part that never changes is still there and it's still undescribable and it's just hanging out and there's nothing you can do about it. It's just there. So all of it just shows us that we're not receiving the appreciation and the compliments because it is not our view of our self and it expands our view of our self which is scary. And so at once we really want the appreciation, we really want the compliments, but we're also rejecting it because what we really want most deeply is approval from ourselves. And it really doesn't matter how many people are going to approve of you if you don't approve of yourself. A thousand people can call you beautiful, but if you think you're ugly, you're going to call them all a liar. And you're never going to let it in. You're never going to get to actually see your own beauty. And so underneath all of this deep wanting for appreciation is the deep wanting for your own appreciation, for seeing yourself as you truly are to see what is beautiful about you, what is intelligent about you. That's the deep want. And when somebody else gives it to us on some level, there's this reminder. And that reminder kicks in and goes, "That's not how you feel about yourself. No, you can't accept that. That's not what you think. That's not your self-concept. No, I no low self-esteem. And it's why giving people compliments often doesn't actually increase their self-esteem. Them doing things that allow them to see their own competence often increases self-esteem. Is the most likely thing to increase self-esteem, not somebody else telling them, "Good job. I really see that." But if you really use the compliment, if you really allow it in, if you allow yourself to see yourself through somebody else's eyes, all of a sudden you can see yourself differently. And that can really start allowing you to give yourself the appreciation that you're looking for.

Summary

We heard you! So many of you loved Joe and Brett’s last coaching breakdown that we are back with another. This time, they review a rapid-fire coaching session that starts out exploring jealousy but evolves into a deep dive into setting boundaries and fear of rejection. Together, they explore:

- Opening the heart to opposing viewpoints

- Feeling through fear of rejection

- Grieving lost love to find the love that is always present
Transcript

Joe: Every no is a better solution to your product, and you're trying to stop them instead of invite them. And the solution is the same as the one that you just got to experience. What is it when you open your heart to the no? 

Brett: I'm Brett Kissler, and this is the Art of Accomplishment, where we explore living the life you want with enjoyment and ease. People really liked our recent rapid coaching commentary episode on stuckness. 

Joe: Yeah, 

Brett: And that was a really good experiment. We were just seeing how that would go, and turns out a lot of people really liked it and have asked for more. We've even had a couple people send in their own rapid coachings with you for us to do commentary on. So there's already a little bit of a backlog there. 

Joe: Yeah. That's great. 

Brett: Yeah, so this is a person from one of our courses who gave us permission to use this session publicly, and we're really grateful for that. And he came in, and he started working with some kind of jealousy that he had around his wife's friend. And over the course of the session, it was tied into the way that he seeks control in both his relationship and in his company. And he came to a really beautiful place of really loving people's no, as new information that can help him make his company or his relationship or his life even better.

Joe: Yeah. I think the thing for me, though that's really important, is the most important part of coaching anybody is understanding yourself, understanding people in general. Yeah. And that comes from personal exploration. And if you are ever interested in coaching, just to say that every one of these conversations is a way for you to explore yourself. It's not a one-way conversation ever. 

Brett: Yeah. So, let's get into it.

Joe: What made you just cross your arms? 

Coachee: Mulling over which question I wanna ask? 'Cause they're both important to me. 

Joe: Okay. How does crossing your arms help you mull that over? 

Coachee: It creates tension in my body, and it actually doesn't help. It's actually when I'm feeling awkward, and that is something I do.

Joe: Ah, great. So it is a form of kind of protection, of feeling awkward is what I'm hearing you say. 

Coachee: Yeah, absolutely. 

Joe: Let's just, how about, let's just be fucking awkward. 

Coachee: Alright. 

Joe: Okay. Hold on a second. So, there's a lot going on already in this coaching session. He's announced a couple things to me immediately in this coaching session.

The first one is that his typical way of, if you have to think about him in the fear triangle, right? He's probably gonna be more in the bully section of the fear triangle, right? There's like there like he doesn't have any problem presenting with anger. He does that immediately with that kind of crossed-arm defensive anger rather than say Oh, I'm stuck or I'm here to save somebody.

But the more important thing that he announces already is that he actually is quite introspective. He knows how to feel into his body. He knows how to say what's going on with him underneath the surface level, which means he's done like a considerable amount of work. So, typically what you'll see is that when, unless somebody else is also in that position of oh I understand what it is to get angry, and that, that's a form of vulnerability. When somebody interacts with somebody like this, they'll be likely to write them off because of the, like the propensity for the err and the propensity for the defensiveness and not be able to see that whole secondary thing that's happening, which is.

He says he's actually quite introspective, quite thoughtful and if you see right here on his face, he like the idea, oh, we can be awkward together like this. And he just totally lights up. It also tells you that he knows and has experienced the freedom behind the defensiveness or the anger.

So all of that I'd say is already happening. That's already, we know all of that if we're gonna walk into this session with him. 

Brett: Wow. Yeah. That's beautiful. Yeah. Great. Let's continue. 

Joe: Great. What's your question? What's your question? 

Coachee: So, there's a stuck point.

Brett: Yeah. For listeners that aren't seeing this on YouTube, Joe just started going blah blah blah to further cut through the awkwardness and it seems to have worked for everybody, including myself watching this. 

Coachee: I've been somatically jealous of my wife's best friend, and after a year of therapy and a bunch of shit, anytime her name comes up, I can't get over it.

Joe: Oh, wow. Cool. How much of this turns into abuse of your wife, emotional abuse of your wife? 

Coachee: Oh it's not good. Yeah, it's pretty bad. 

Brett: Wow. So that was a pretty quick leap right there. Yeah. Can you say more on that? 

Joe: Yeah. He's already presented that he, in the fear triangle, his habituated place is anger. And so usually if that's your place, there's gonna be not, there's two things that are happening. One is that you're probably gonna release the anger on somebody. In our society, generally, we'll call that abuse or emotional abuse, and everybody will recognize that, including the person who's doing the yelling.

Whereas if it's passive aggressive, then oftentimes the person doesn't recognize that they're doing the abuse and so they can't actually see it. So for me, the question was not just like I wanted to understand his awareness and I wanted to understand how deep the pattern went. And by the way, just all jealousy is abuse.

Jealousy of somebody is, it's like I'm going to have a big emotional reaction to try to control you to do something else. It's the jealous person's way of pushing love away as well as, like wanting it, wanting the love and affection but pushing it away at the same time. So all of that would say there's abuse going on there. That would be the pattern behind it. 

Brett: Yeah. And the jealousy can also, another aspect of it can be like a discomfort with someone else's autonomy, which can also point to the control that, yeah. Later on will come up in the session. 

Joe: Absolutely. And the cool thing about if you really watch him here he's yeah, it's not good.

Like he, he can admit it and see it. And so there's, again, he's showing us that there is this consciousness, and so the availability is there. Like, oftentimes you talk about, there's some forms of therapy that you do. It's like the quote that I heard once was like 10 years later, you can describe exactly what's wrong with you, but nothing has changed.

And then there's this form of therapy where you can't describe shit but everything has changed and there's a whole bunch of cool reasons behind that. I think the best explanation I've ever heard is that if you're in theta, which is where we get programmed from zero to eight years old, 'cause that's the brainwave that we're dominantly in during that time period. It feels more like a dream. You can't quite understand everything that's going on, but things change. Whereas if you're in more of a like typical brain state of say, alpha or beta, then typically what's happening is that you can describe it all, but you haven't reprogrammed that subconscious that happens and is programmed in that zero to eight years old. So what he's showing us is that he's very smart. He's showing us that he understands himself, at least on an intellectual level. And he is also showing himself that he's there's not a shit ton of shame there. There's shame, but there's not he's not hiding it from us. He's yeah, boom. This is what's up with me. Yeah. Which shows a lot of bravery. 

Brett: Yeah. And on the emotional fluidity level, it's also a sign that the emotion just hasn't moved. You can have the story, you can understand what the pattern is, but some underlying emotion hasn't moved and that, I think would link to the theta as well. Like the emotion moving, being in the emotional state of moving something that hasn't, that's been stagnant has a similar effect, could be tracked similarly. 

Joe: That's right. There's a lot of emotional movement that can't be understood by the brain for sure.

Brett: Yeah. 

Joe: Yeah. 

Brett: Awesome. Let's continue. 

Coachee: It's pretty bad. I threw a giant tantrum of a fucking psychological meltdown all through last year, making her choose between her and me. Yeah, only to realize it's my own issue, obviously. Hence the question. 

Joe: Yeah. Yeah. Great. Okay, cool. So you realize the jealousy, you realize there's an abusive quality to it. What are you trying to control for in the jealousy? 

Brett: Yeah. And right there, that's the leap to control. He's recognizing the jealousy. You helped him immediately recognize the abuse. He already saw it there, but you brought it into the frame and now control. 

Joe: Which is every time we're in fear triangle, no matter what you're in, whether you're in the victim or the, you're trying to control the situation. It is fear. Oh, I'm scared. So I'm trying to control, and that's what creates the drama, and that's what creates all the pain. So, definitely, that's what made me ask the question. 

Brett: All right. 

Joe: If you could make something happen that would go, oh, I have that now. I don't really care about this relationship with her best friend. What's the thing you're trying to? 

Brett: That laugh right there? 

Joe: Yeah. 

Brett: I'm curious what in that laugh. 

Joe: So what I saw was that I asked the question the first way and it's hitting him. It's hitting him on a subconscious level. He hasn't like fully gone through that thought process. So he's 4-0-4 in a little bit. He's seen, he's more spaciousness is occurring. And then I ask it a different way to make it more accessible to him. And then he the laugh that I see right there is that he sees something about himself and not only does he see it, but he can also see that it's funny that there's something in it for him. And so again, not shame, just like a lightness, which is really quite sweet. 

Brett: Yeah. Awesome. 

Joe: Great. 

Coachee: A public company? 

Joe: No. With the relationship with your wife. 

Coachee: Yeah. Like, I view this person to be a blocker in my life, to my hopes and dreams. 

Joe: Okay. So if this person was like a hundred percent supportive of you and was like, let me help you with the company, then that would be fine. Or do you actually have to create the company? 

Coachee: Oh no, the company's created, but it's like, she's like a rowing in the other direction. You know what I mean? It's like of an anti-capitalist type mindset that's influencing my fucking life. 

Joe: Oh, I get it. Okay. Okay. Okay. Got it. Cool. Lovely. What stops you from loving the fuck out of the anti-capitalist in you, your wife and this woman? 

Coachee: Because you just said capital and money is the sun. I think it's fucking stupid. If you do good shit for the world, you should get paid for it and not hide behind cowardice.

Joe: Okay. Hold on a second. Hold on. Because something big is about to happen, but I want to talk about what just happened. So a lot of times, like people will be like, Oh, Joe, you contradict yourself. This is a perfect example. So if I recall correctly, the coaching that I did right before this was all about this person thinking money was bad and we were like seeing through that belief system. And here he is like taking that thing and saying, look Joe, you just said money is awesome, money is the sun.

So like you can see there's this part of him, and I'm about to almost contradict myself. And if I fully contradicted myself, that would be fine because the way I think about it is that if I'm gonna point to a tree. I'm gonna point to it differently depending on where you're standing. My arm's gonna move. And so where he's standing pointing to the truth is gonna be different. It's gonna sound different. It's gonna look different. And his freedom isn't in seeing the goodness of money, though, there's probably some freedom in that for him. There's still some judgment that he has around it, or he wouldn't buy into any of this stuff. But the bigger freedom is for him right now is to like, Hey, what are you defending? What makes you have to defend this? So I'm just pointing at the thing I'm always pointing at the thing that I think will show someone the possibility of freedom and the truth that I'm pointing to is the freedom, not the intellectual idea that's coming outta my mouth.

Brett: Yeah, 

Joe: I think that's just a really important thing to, to recognize not just in a coaching session, but in your own worldview, as you're approaching life, being able to hold two opposing ideas at the same time and see the truth in both of them. There's a tremendous amount of freedom in that.

And so that's basically what we're doing here. And I just say that because I think anybody who's watching this, see what life looks like when you're actually able to hold opposing viewpoints. 

Brett: Yeah. And in, in a team, that's how conflict gets resolved when all viewpoints can be held in the complexity of the overarching perspective.

Joe: Yeah.

Brett: Then there's resolution, tension remains, but yeah, the conflict resolves. 

Joe: Yeah. Awesome. So let's see it back up just a little bit, just because I'm about to whack him a little bit. 

Brett: All right. 

Coachee: And not hide behind cowardice. 

Joe: Yeah. And I noticed all the defense in that. 

Coachee: Wait, what? 

Joe: Like that your heart had to harden to be able to say that. Which means there's something in you that believes that capitalism is wrong and capitalism is wrong. I can give you fucking 30 reasons why it's wrong. It does not create equal opportunity is just one of them. 

Brett: That look was just like, fuck you Joe. 

Joe: Yeah, it's so good. 

Brett: He was like, no. 

Joe: I came to you, just said money is the sun. I came here to get my worldview verified and it is verified, but it's also but not at the exclusion of closing your heart, not at the exclusion of being able to see the truth in other worldviews. 

Brett: Yeah and continue. 

Joe: Go to where your grandparents came from and you can fucking see it right there. So there capitalism is wrong. Just simply. 

Coachee: I wanna believe that too. 

Joe: Yeah, exactly. So what if you don't defend against that? 

Coachee: Let me actually get deeper my issue... 

Joe: Oh, No. Just first, what if you don't defend against that right now, just allow and like actually have an open heart to the fact that capitalism is not a perfect system. Money is not in any way a perfect system. You're thinking about it, but I'm asking you to open your heart to it. You have kids, you have a daughter. 

Brett: I noticed when you said he was thinking about it, he was looking around, looking as though looking for an answer. And then when you said go to your heart, open your heart to it. He like tensed his eyebrows down and closed his eyes. It went internal, but there's a, there's some like tension in it. 

Joe: Yeah. 

Brett: What do you see in that process happening right now? 

Joe: He's attempting to, he's attempting it. And he'll get there. And so it's like just, it's just loving patience at this point because that's what he needs for himself. 

Because anything that anybody is doing to others, they're doing to themselves too, right? Which means that he has his own thoughts that he doesn't allow if he doesn't allow the thoughts externally, because he thinks he needs to be able to compartmentalize, to be able to get stuff done, to control.

So anything that I'm seeing externally I know is happening internally. So if I start jumping in on it right now, then I'm just reifying the part of him that thinks he needs to manage himself instead of just bring awareness to the problem. 

Brett: Yeah. Lovely. 

Joe: I want you to open your heart. I want you to open your heart to the idea that capitalism is not perfect, the same way you open your heart to your daughter.

There it was. There you go. 

Anything get destroyed? 

Brett: So what happened right there for listeners is that tension on his brow just dropped, and you could see him land in his body. 

Coachee: Yeah. Like a hyper vigilance. 

Joe: Yeah. That's gonna help you build a better company. Seeing capital for what it is allows you to make a better company. Having non-automated vigilance will help you make a better company. You think control is gonna make a better company, but that's not how it works. Here's a guess that I have. Are you're the CEO of a company? 

Coachee: Recent CEO. 

Joe: How many people-ish? 

Coachee: Um, just a handful of us. 

Joe: Okay. And have you managed a team before? Like a sizable team? 

Coachee: Yeah. 

Joe: Yeah. Okay. My guess is, I may be wrong, but my guess is that one of the things that has happened in your career is you think that you have alignment from the team and then people do different things and stray and you get very frustrated 'cause you're like, wait, I thought we all fucking agreed on this.

Coachee: Yeah. 

Joe: Yeah. So it's the same issue that you're dealing with your wife and best friend or, and her best friend. 

Brett: Awesome. I love that tying both of those things together that really helps tie together, even for listeners, the way that our personal life patterns and our work patterns are the same thing.

Joe: Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Him managing people like that, managing the wife, like that, it's applying force. And the way that I think about it is that if you apply force to something, it has to push back. Rather than, oh, how do I harvest the wisdom of the no, which I think I'm about to go into.

Brett: Yeah. That's where you're going with this. So let's go there. 

Joe: That you're dealing with your wife and best friend or, and her best friend, is that you are rejecting the No. Instead of excited about the no. 

Coachee: Oh, 

Brett: Now he sees it. 

Joe: Yeah. You got it. Yeah. Every no is a better solution to your product. Every no is a refinement of a process that can make you more efficient and you're trying to stop them instead of invite them every, no provides clarity. Maybe just a little bit of clarity. But some clarity. 

Coachee: Yeah. Yeah. I completely actually fucking agree with you. 

Joe: Great. And the solution is the same as the one that you just got to experience. What is it when you open your heart to the no? You don't accept it as, I'm bad. It's a bad solution. It's a bad company. You're just like, ah, there's truth to that too. 

Brett: Yeah. You can really see him sitting with this and mulling it over. There's definitely, there's intellect online, trying to confirm, deny look for evidence for against, but his body's there too now in a way that it wasn't earlier in the session?

Joe: That's right. 

Coachee: Thank you so much, Joe. 

Joe: Pleasure, man. 

Coachee: And in the perfect time, my chair moves and fucking sign from the university. 

Joe: Rock and roll. 

Brett: Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. That was a cool one. Thank you. Thank you to this anonymous person for for letting us dissect this session publicly. 

Joe: I think just as a, something, just something about the no generally and the open the heart and the holding to opposing viewpoints. 

Brett: Yeah,

Joe: I know we, we mentioned it a little bit, having the, opening your heart and like opening the wisdom of the different viewpoints is really profoundly important if you want to create like a certain level of freedom. And this includes like the thing in the voice in your head, right?

So the voice in your head is talking to see the truth in the non-truth of everything it says, to see the truth in the non-truth of all these things. It really creates a very open perspective. It can create a lot of wisdom. It creates a lot of spaciousness internally. What I noticed is that when people start experimenting with that then they'll be like, oh, I don't know what to do. That's true? And that's true and that's true? Like they have this, the problem of is and isn't is the way I've heard it described. It's yeah, that's true and it's not true. So what the fuck do I do? But there's only one thing that's gonna feel right when you do it.

There's only one thing. 

Brett: Yeah. You're no longer navigating from the mind. 

Joe: And so let your mind do all the processing. Look at the spreadsheets, look at the, the pros and cons, what, do the intellectual debate. It's fantastic. And then take a moment and like really feel like what's, what feels like the right thing to do?

And give credence to the frustration or the fear, or the whatever. It's the same thing. It's oh, I'm gonna open my heart to the frustration and the fear, especially if you're running a business, that frustration is usually a good sign that oh, like we're not being determined enough or we're not pushing hard enough. And the fear is probably a good sign. Oh, there's something that we're not accounting for, or there's a risk that we're taking that we need to risk adjust for, or to be prepared for, or whatever. Like, all of those are really good signs and it becomes a lot less about like, on the intellectual plane. It's oh, I can see, and the emotional plane, oh, I can feel all of it. I can see all of it. But on the what to do is far more of a gut response is there's only one thing, there's only one thing that's gonna feel right. And so if you're playing with it, if you go home and you play with this and you're start opening yourself up to no's, also just consider oh yeah and there's just one thing that is your truth. 

Brett: Yeah. And it's gonna be a feeling. Yeah. And so one thing that's common in this, in many sessions and core to the work that we do is that like I'm, and the questions just here is what makes it that opening your heart to the opposing viewpoint is so difficult for people?

Joe: There's so many. One is you usually have to feel something you don't wanna feel. Two is, the way that we create distinction is the way that we define our personality. So to be able to see the wisdom of the Biden side and the Trump side. Woo, man. You're gonna have to let go of some of your personality. You're gonna have to feel certain things. You're gonna have to feel the fear and the loss. Those are two of the, two of the reasons why it's scary. I think the other reason it's scary is because you don't get to be right anymore. Like you can't believe the voice in your head, you can't believe your own thoughts. You've seen me do this where people are like, you, like you don't know what you're talking about. I'm like, yeah. Correct. Yeah. Yes, and you just made this up. That's right. Like we all did. Yeah. And so you don't get to hang on to any of that. You just get to, to be, and that's that, that can be very destabilizing for people for a short period of time. 

Brett: Yeah. And I think in our culture, being right is tied with being accepted, being loved. So that's if we're not. It's not just that it feels uncomfortable and groundless, it's also that, our entire body has associated it with a loss of love.

Joe: That's right. 

Brett: So to let ourselves not be right, we have to open ourselves up to feeling the love that has been lost. 

Joe: Yeah, that's right. Feeling the love that can't be lost, which is even scarier. And the love that has been lost. Yeah. Beautifully said. Cool. Awesome. That was a fun one. Thanks for doing that with me. 

Brett: Yeah, thank you, Joe. 

Joe: Yeah, man, appreciate it. 

Brett: Yeah. And thank you to our guest, really appreciate you. 

Joe: Thank you. 

Brett: Putting yourself out there, that was a vulnerable one. 

Joe: Yeah. And I hope this serves you to be able to see it again in this format. Yeah. All right. Talk to you soon.

Brett: Thank you. Thanks for listening to The Art of Accomplishment. If you enjoyed what you heard today, please subscribe and rate us on your podcast app. We'd love your feedback, so feel free to send us questions or comments. You can reach out to us, join our newsletter, or check out our courses at artofaccomplishment.com.

I have a tough time to go all in on my business. Um the resistance to really um to ask and to to put myself out there like to like there's a coaching client for instance and I know I can help them but to really go for the ask like to um >> What did you do before coaching? Um, I've been a um a tennis player. >> Okay. >> Did you have a problem asking for what you needed there? >> Um, I wanted um certain coaches but I sometimes wasn't able to yeah to work with these types of coaches. uh due to my parents like when I was younger. >> So you were told asking what did what what did your parents tell you about asking for what you wanted? You you just said it was your parents who stopped it. >> Yeah, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. When I was younger, uh when I wanted to work with certain type of coaches, that was a small part of it. Um yeah. >> No, what did they say? What what was their >> um it was too expensive for instance or or it was not possible. Yeah. >> Or it wasn't possible. And so you want to be you want to coach other people in tennis. Is that right? >> So um I was coaching um people uh in tennis uh after that. Yeah. >> And is that what you want? That's the thing you have a hard time saying like I can really help you. >> Yeah. To Yeah. >> Gotcha. What's happening to you right now? It seems like there like I'm asking you questions, but it seems like what's what's going on? Uh, I feel a lot of heat right now in my body. >> Okay. >> Um, yeah. >> When you were playing tennis, did you have a hard time going after what you wanted? >> Yeah. >> Like in the in the moment of playing, not not like you're on the court, did you have a hard time going after what you wanted? my body would tense up. But um I I gave it my all. Yeah. >> So even there, like if you were being fully aggressive in your wants on the tennis court, you would have some resistance. >> Yeah. >> Gotcha. The same kind of resistance that's happening right now. >> Mhm. >> Gotcha. If I'm just going to talk to the resistance. So your job isn't to answer like you. Your job is just to answer as the resistance for a moment. What is it that you're resisting? I'm not asking you to change. You can resist as much as you like. I just would like to know what you're resisting. sadness. And what makes you resist it? Not wanting to be seen as sad. What happens to you if you're seen as sad? Um, that feels like um quite scary. Lot some anxiety come up even just now just closing my eyes or looking away. >> Yeah. So you were just feeling sad. Everybody saw you were feeling sad. What are you scared will happen? >> Again, I'm not asking you to not resist. Feel free to resist all you like. Um, what am I resisting? What was the question again? >> What are you scared is going to happen if you show your sadness? What are you scared is going to happen right now because you just showed your sadness? >> Yeah. I just I just feel terrified. I 500 people just saw your sadness. What are you scared is going to happen? >> How they are going to react? >> How apparently this is how they're going to react. Um yeah. What what's what what's what's the reaction you're scared of? 500 people. Someone's going to react this way. So, let's get let's let's see what it is. Someone currently is reacting to your sadness in the exact way you're scared of. We just don't know what you're scared of. So, tell me what you're scared of. Just expresses just um They're going to get mad at you. They're going to get sad at you. They're going to make fun of you. They're going to take advantage of you. What are they going to do? Reject me. >> Oh, awesome. Why? What on earth would make you worry about being rejected by somebody if you're already rejecting yourself? You've rejected your wants. You've rejected your sadness. You've rejected your resistance. Like, how on earth could somebody else reject you in a way that's going to have any kind of dent on that? If I said to you right now, I'm done with you. I'm not helping you anymore, and I reject you. Is it going to hurt more than what you're doing to yourself? >> Probably not. I guess I'm just not noticing that I'm rejecting myself. It's very unconscious, >> you know. As soon as you said it, you started speaking clearly. As soon as you said that, you're like, "Oh, you're like, you're here with me. You're not That was like a full sentence. You just said the whole thing like no resistance." What I'm saying right now will probably [ __ ] that up. So, I apologize. But like, yeah, just stay say that again. I I guess I guess I'm not noticing that I'm rejecting myself. >> Yeah, I guess I'm not noticing that I'm uh rejecting myself. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Why reject yourself? What would make what would make that a like a valuable good thing to do? Um, it's not been helping. Um, um, so just backing up. >> So I don't really have to go for it. >> Yeah. So that you cannot get rejected. If I fully go for it and it doesn't happen, then I get rejected. So, I'll reject myself so that I don't have to go for it. So, I won't get rejected. Check it out. The only way in life to not get rejected is to make sure you reject yourself first. There's the sadness. So, here's a weird one. I want you to look inside yourself and see if you can find anything worth rejecting. Anything. >> Anything worth rejecting? I I I don't know. I doesn't really feel great. So then welcome it. Welcome the whole thing just for like one minute. See what it's like to welcome yourself completely. Yeah. So, I know this is a weird one. Another weird one. So I asked you to welcome yourself completely. The first thing that presented was this sadness that showed up. And now I want you to feel your ambition. There you go. Even though your ambition is been pushed down, down behind a whole bunch of [ __ ] I see it and I really admire it. I appreciate it. I look forward to seeing it just [ __ ] set free. And you on this call right now is an action of ambition. You going for it on this call right now as an act and an action of ambition. So, one more time before we go. What is it to welcome yourself since there's nothing worth rejecting? Great. What a total pleasure. Thank you. >> Thanks. Thanks for watching this co-stream video and it's probably the sexiest thing that we do here at the art of accomplishment, but by no means is it the most effective. The most effective thing that we do for transformation and changing people's lives is our courses. And the best place to start our coursework is with the connection course. So if you're interested in learning more, just click on the link below.

Here’s why you’re constantly seeking approval: 

You reject compliments. 

And you don’t reject compliments because you’re humble.

You reject them because they threaten your identity of not being enough.

The coaching breakdown episode was so popular that we are back with another. A while back, I did a Rapid Coaching session with someone who was experiencing a lot of jealousy, but as we explored it we discovered his struggle with setting boundaries and fear of rejection. Together, we dove into:

- Opening the heart to opposing viewpoints
- Feeling through fear of rejection
- Grieving lost love to find the love that is always present

Brett Kistler and I further break down what’s happening in this session and how I approach my coaching. You can check the video out on our YouTube channel or listen in on your favorite podcast platform. I hope you enjoy it.

I'm always pointing to the thing that I think will show someone the the the possibility of freedom and the truth that I'm pointing to is the freedom not the intellectual idea that I'm that's coming out of my mouth I think that's just a really important thing to recognize not just in a coaching session but in your own worldview like as you're approaching life being able to hold two opposing ideas at the same time and see the truth in both of them there's a tremendous amount of freedom in that people really liked our recent rapid coaching commentary episode on stuckness yeah and uh that was a really good experiment we were just seeing how that would go and turns out a lot of people really liked it and have asked for more we've even had a couple people send in their own rapid coachings with you for for us to do commentary on so there's already a little bit of a backlog there yeah that's great so this is a this is a person from one of our courses who gave us permission to to use this session publicly and we're really grateful for that and he came in and he started working with some kind of jealousy that he had around his wife's friend and over the course of the session it was tied into the way that he seeks control in both his relationship and his company and he came to a really beautiful place of really loving people's no uh as as new information that can help him make his company or his relationship or his life even better yeah I think the thing for me though that's really important is if we're going to do this is that we do it and it's more based about the patterns that we see because I think that's something that can really inform the the danger that we get into in this is that to mimic other people's like um tricks or techniques or something like that really takes away the most important part of coaching anybody which is understanding yourself understanding people in general and that comes from personal exploration and and if you are ever interested in coaching just to say that every one of these conversations is a way for you to explore yourself it's not a one-way conversation ever uh so let's let's get into it yeah so um what made you just cross your arms mulling over which question I want to ask because they're both important to me okay what how does crossing your arms help you mold that over it creates tension in my body and it actually doesn't help it's actually a uh when I'm feeling awkward and that is something I do ah great so it's a form of kind of protection of feeling awkward is what I mean you say yeah yeah absolutely let's just how about let's just be awkward okay okay hold on a second so there's a lot going on already in this coaching session so the he's announced a couple things to me immediately in this coaching section the first one is that his you know his typical way of like if if you have to think about him in the fear triangle right he's probably going to be more in the bully section of the fear triangle right there's like there like he doesn't have any problem presenting with anger he does that immediately with that kind of cross armed defense of anger rather than say like oh I'm stuck or or I'm here to save somebody but the more important thing that he announces already is that he actually is quite um he's quite introspective he knows how to feel into his body he knows how to say what's going on with him underneath the surface level which means he's done a like a considerable amount of work so typically what you'll see is that when unless somebody else is also in that position of like oh I I understand what it is to get angry and that that's a form of vulnerability when somebody interacts with somebody like this they'll be likely to write them off because of the like the propensity for like the ER and the ensity for the defensiveness and not be able to see that whole secondary thing that's happening which is he says he's actually quite introspective quite thoughtful and and if you see right here on his face he like the idea oh we can be awkward together like this like and he just totally lights up it also tells you that he knows and has experienced the freedom behind the behind the the defensiveness or the anger so all of that I'd say is already happening that's already we know all of that if we're going to walk into this session with him wow yeah that's beautiful yeah great let's continue great what's your question what's your question um so there's there's a stuck Point um yeah for for listeners that aren't seeing this on YouTube Joe just started going to kind of further cut through the awkwardness uh and it seems to have worked for everybody including myself watching this I've been somatically jealous of my wife's best friend and after a year of therapy and a bunch of anytime her name comes up I can't get over it oh wow cool how how how much of of this turns into abuse of your wife emotional abuse of your wife oh it's it's not good yeah it's pretty bad wow so that was a pretty quick leap right there yeah yeah can you say more on that yeah well he's already presented that he in the fear triangle his his habituated place is anger and so usually if that's your place there's going to be not there's two things that are happening one is that you're probably going to release the anger on somebody in our Society generally will call that abuse or emotional abuse and everybody will kind of recognize that including the person who's doing the yelling whereas if it's passive aggressive then often times the person doesn't recognize that they're doing the abuse and so they can't actually see it so for me the question was not just like I wanted to understand his awareness and I wanted to understand the patter How deep the pattern went and by the way just all jealousy is abuse jealousy of somebody is it's like I'm going to have a big emotional reaction to try to control you to do something else it's the jealous person's way of pushing love away as well as like say like wanting it wanting the love and affection but pushing it away at the same time so all of that would say there's abuse going on there that would be the pattern behind it yeah yeah and the jealousy can also another aspect of it can be like a discomfort with someone else's autonomy which can also point to the the control that later on will come up in the session absolutely and the cool thing about if you really watch him here he's he's like he's he's like yeah it's not good like he he can admit it and see it and so there's again he's showing us that there is this Consciousness and so the availability is there like he you know often times you talk about there's some forms of therapy that you do it's like the the quote that I heard once was like 10 years later you can describe exactly what's wrong with you but nothing has changed and then there's this form of therapy where you can't describe but everything has changed and there's a whole bunch of cool reasons behind that I think the best explanation I've ever heard is that if you're in Theta which is where we get programmed from 0 to 8 years old because that's the brain wave that we're dominantly in during that time period um you know it feels more like a dream you can't quite understand everything that's going on but things change whereas if you're in more of a like typical brain state of say uh alpha or beta then typically what's happening is that you can describe it all but you haven't reprogrammed that subconscious that happens and is programmed in that 0 to eight years old so he but what he's showing us is that he's very smart he's showing us that he understands himself at least on an intellectual level and he is also showing himself that he's like there's not a ton of Shame there there's shame but there's not like he's not hiding it from us he's like yeah boom this is what's up with me yeah which shows a a lot of Bravery yeah yeah and and on the emotional fluidity level it's also like the a sign that the emotion just hasn't moved you can have the story you can understand what the pattern is but some underlying emotion hasn't moved and that I think would link to the Theta as well like the emotion moving being in the emotional state of moving something that hasn't that's been stagnant uh has has a similar effect be Tred similarly that's right there's a lot of emotional movement that can't be understood by the brain for sure yeah yeah yeah awesome let's continue pretty bad I uh threw a giant tantrum of a psychological meltdown all through last year making her choose between her and me yeah only to realize it's my own issue obviously hence the question yeah yeah yeah great Okay cool so you realize the jealousy you realize there's an abusive quality to it what are you trying to control for in the jealousy yeah and right there that's the the leap to control you're he's recognizing the jealousy you helped him immediately recognize the abuse he already saw it there but you brought it into the frame and now control right which is every time we're in fear triangle no matter what you're whether you're in the in the victim or the you're trying to control the situ it is fear oh I'm scared so I'm trying to control and that's what creates the drama and that's what creates all the pain so definitely that's that's why you would that's that's what made me ask the question all right if you could make something happen that would go oh I have that now I don't really care about this relationship with her best friend what's the thing you're trying to that laugh right there yeah I'm curious what you see in that laugh so what I saw was that I asked the question the first way and it and it's it's hitting him it's hitting him on a subconscious level he hasn't like fully gone through that thought process so he's like 404ing a little bit he's seen he's like more spaciousness is occurring and then I asked it a different way to make it more accessible to him and and then he the the laugh that I see right there is that he sees something about himself and not only does he see it but he can also see that it's kind of funny that there's like a there's something in it for him and and so again not shame just like a lightness which is really quite sweet yeah awesome great uh a public company no no with the relationship with your wife yeah like I view this I view this person to be a Blocker in my life to the my hopes and dreams okay so if this person was like like 100% supportive of you and was like let me help you with the company then that would be fine or do you actually have to create the company oh no the company's created but it's like she's like a rowing in the other direction you know what I mean it's like an anti- capitalist type mindset that's influencing my life oh I get it okay okay okay okay got it cool lovely um what stops you from loving the out of the anti- capitalist in you your wife and this woman because you just said capital and money is the sun I think it's stupid if you do good for the world you should get paid for it and not hide behind cowardice okay hold on a second hold on cuz something big is about to happen but I want to talk about what just happened which is so a lot of times like people will be like oh you know Joe you contradict yourself this is a perfect example so if I recall correctly the coaching that I did right before this was all about this person thinking money was bad and we were like seen through that belief system and here he he's like taking that thing and saying look Joe you just said money is awesome money is the Sun so like you can see like there's this part of him and I'm about to almost contradict myself but the the important and if I fully contradicted myself that would be fine because the way I I think about it is like if I'm going to point to a tree I'm going to point to it differently depending on where you're standing like it's you know my arm's going to move and so where he's standing pointing to the truth is going to be different I'm going to it's going to sound different it's going to look different and his freedom isn't in seen the goodness of money though there's probably some freedom in that for him there's still some judgment that he has around it or he wouldn't buy into any of this stuff but but the bigger freedom is for him right now is to like hey what are you defending like why what makes you have to defend this so I'm just not po I'm just pointing at the thing I'm always pointing at the thing that I think will show someone the the the possibility of freedom and the truth that I'm pointing to is the freedom not the intellectual idea that I'm that's coming out of my mouth I think that's just a really important thing for to to recognize not just in a coaching session but in your own worldview like as you're approaching life you know being able to hold to opposing ideas at the same time and see the truth in both of them there's a tremendous amount of freedom in that and and so that's basically what we're doing here and and I just say that because I think anybody who's watching this like see what life looks like when you're actually able to hold opposing viewpoints yeah and and in in a team you know that's how conflict gets resolved when when all viewpoints can be held in the complexity of the overarching perspective yeah then then there's resolution tension remains but yeah the conflict resolves yeah awesome and not hide behind cowardice yeah right and I noticed all the defense in that wait what like that your heart had to harden to be able to say that which means there's something in you that believes that that believes that capitalism is wrong and capitalism is wrong I can give you 30 reasons why it's wrong it does not create equal opportunity is just one of them that look was just like you Joe yeah so good he was like no I came here you just said money is the sun I came here to get my worldview verified and and it is verified but it's also like it it's but not at the exclusion of closing your heart not at the exclusion of being able to see the truth in other World Views yeah and we continue it does not create equal opportunity is just one of them them okay I don't care about equal results it just doesn't create equal opportunity go to where your grandparents came from and you can see it right there so there capitalism is wrong just simply I want to believe that too so yeah exactly so what if you don't defend against that well let me actually get deeper my issue no no no no no just first what if you don't defend against that right now just allow and and like actually have an open heart to the fact that capitalism is not not a perfect system money is not in any way a perfect system you're thinking about it but I'm asking you to open your heart to it you have kids you have a daughter I notice when when you said he was thinking about it he was looking around you know looking as though looking for an answer and then when you said like go to your heart open your heart to it he like tensed his eyebrows down and closed his eyes it kind of went internal but there's there's some like tension in it yeah what do you see in that process happening right now he's attempting to he's attempting he's like yeah there's just it's yeah and and and he'll get there mhm and so it's like just it's just loving patience at this point yeah because that's what he needs for himself right because anything that anybody is doing to others you know they're doing to themselves too right which means that he has his own thoughts that he doesn't allow if he doesn't allow the thoughts externally because he thinks he needs to be able to compartmentalize to be able to get stuff done to control so anything that I'm seeing externally I know is happening internally so if I start jumping in on it right now then I'm just reifying the part of him that thinks he needs to manage himself instead of just bring awareness to the problem MH yeah lovely I want you to open your heart I want you to open your heart to the idea that capitalism is not perfect the same way you open your heart to your daughter there you go there it was yeah anything get destroyed so what happened right there for listeners is that tension on his brow just dropped and you could see him land in his body yeah yeah like a hyper vigilance yeah yeah that's going to help you build a better company seeing capital for what it is allows you to make a better company having non-automated vigilance will help you make a better company you think control is going to make a better company but that's not how it works here's a guess that I have are you're the CEO of a company how many recent CEO how many people is um uh just a handful of us okay so and have you managed a team before like a size team yeah okay so yeah my guess is I may be wrong but my guess is that one of the things that um has happened in your career is you think that you have alignment from the team and then people kind of do different things and stray and you get very frustrated cuz you're like wait I thought all agreed on this yeah yeah so it's the same issue that you're dealing with with your wife and best friend or and her best friend awesome I love that tying tying both of those things together that really helps tie together even for listeners the way that our personal life patterns and our work patterns are the same thing yeah that's right yeah like our him managing people like that managing the wife like that it's applying force and the way that I think about it is that like if you apply Force to something it has to push back rather than oh how do I harvest the wisdom of the of the no which I think I think I I'm about to go into so let's go there wife and best friend or and her best friend is that you are rejecting the no instead of excited about the no now he sees it you got it yeah every know is a better solution to your product every know is a refinement of a process that can make you more efficient and you're trying to stop them instead of invite them every no provides Clarity maybe just a little bit of clarity but some clarity yeah yeah I completely actually agree with you great and the solution is the same as the one that you just got to experience what is it when you open your heart to the no you don't accept it as I'm bad it's a bad solution it's a bad company you're just like ah right there's truth to that too yeah I can really see him sitting with this yeah and mulling it over there's definitely there's intellect online but it's in his body trying to confirm deny look for evidence for against but is his body is there too now in a way that it wasn't earlier in the session that's right thank you so much Joe pleasure perfect time my chair moves that's sign from the universe rock and awesome yeah yeah well that was a cool one thank you thank you to this Anonymous person for uh for letting us dissect this session publicly just as a as a as a some just something about the know generally and the open the heart and the holding to opposing viewpoints um yeah I know we we mentioned it a little bit having the opening your heart and like opening the wisdom of the different viewpoints is really really profoundly important if you if you want to create like a certain level of freedom and this is includes like the thing in the voice in your head right so the voice in your head is talking to see the truth and the nontruth of everything it says to see the truth and the nontruth of all these things it really creates a very open perspective it can create a lot of wisdom it it creates a lot of spaciousness internally um what i notic is that when people start experimenting with that then they'll be like oh I don't know what to do like that's true and that's true and that's true like they have this the problem of isn't isn't is the way I've heard it described it's like yeah that's true and it's not true so what the do I do um but there's only one thing that's going to feel right when you do it only navigating from the mind right yeah and so let your mind do all the processing look at the spreadsheets look at the look at the you know the pros and cons what you know do the intellectual debate it's fantastic and then take a moment and like really feel like what's what feels like the right thing to do and and give Credence to the frustration or the fear or the whatever it's the same thing it's like oh I'm going to open my heart to the frustration and the fear especially if you're running a business that frustration is usually a good sign that like oh like we're we're not being determined enough or or we're not pushing hard enough and and the fear is probably a good sign like oh there's something that we're not accounting for or there's a risk that we're taking that we need to risk adjust for or to be prepared for or whatever like all of those are really good signs and so it becomes a lot less about like on the intellectual plane it's like oh I can see in the emotional plan oh I can feel all of it I can see all of it but on the like what to do is far more of a gut response is like there's only one thing there's only one thing that's going to feel right and so if you're playing with it if you go home you play with this and you're start opening yourself up to nose also just consider like oh yeah and there's just one thing that is your truth yeah and it's going to be a feeling yeah yeah and and so one thing that's common in this in many many sessions and kind of core to the work that we do is that like I'm and the question just here is like what what makes it that opening your heart to the opposing Viewpoint is so difficult for people ah there's like so many one is you usually have to feel something you don't want to feel to is you know the way that we create distinction is the way that we Define our personality so to be able to see the wisdom of the Biden side and and the Trump side W man you're going to have to let go of some of your personality you're going to have to feel certain things you're going to have to feel the the fear and the loss and you know those are two of the two of the reasons why it's scary um I think the other reason it's scary is because like you don't get to be right anymore like you you can't you can't believe the voice in your head you can't believe your own thoughts you know like I mean you've seen me do this where people are like you like you don't know what you're talking about I'm like yeah correct yeah like yes and but you just made this up that's right like we all did and so so you don't get to like hang on to any of that that you just get to to be and that's that's that that can be very destabilizing for people for a short period of time yeah and I I think in our culture being right is tied with being accepted being loved being so that's if we're not right it's not just that it feels uncomfortable and groundless it's also that it our entire body has Associated it with a loss of love that's right so there's so to to let ourselves not be right we have to open ourselves up to feeling the love that has been lost yeah that's right feeling the love that can't be lost which is even scarier yeah and the love that has been lost yeah beautifully said Thank you cool awesome that was a fun one thanks for doing that you Joe yeah man appreciate it all right thank you to Our Guest uh really appreciate thank you putting yourself out there that was a vulnerable one yeah and I hope I hope this serves you to be able to see it again in this format yeah yeah all right talk to you soon bye

Summary

We grow up in a world where seeking approval is assumed, expected. Authority figures (like parents) assume the responsibility of approval or disapproval to teach their offspring how to move through the world. It’s also a kind of currency: it determines who we are, where we belong, what doors open for us. But at some point, some of us begin to wonder—what happens if I stop asking for permission? In this episode, Joe and Brett wrestle with the complexity of approval-seeking and how to break free from it. They explore:

- The push and pull between belonging and authenticity

- The weight of societal norms and expectation

- The way doubt and conditioning pull us from our innate wisdom

- The necessity of discomfort in the pursuit of true authenticity

- The somatic cues that indicate when we are honoring our truth—or avoiding it

- Practical exercises for cultivating self-approval
Transcript

Joe: The way to overcome that hurdle is to look at the process and say, okay, I understand that if I do this regularly and enough, that the world will move itself to meet me. Same with my daughter, the world moved itself to say, oh, you are now self-possessed. We will treat you as such. 

Brett: Yeah. 

Joe: Or you are now loving yourself, so we're going to surround you with people who love you. The world will create something for you that supports your truth. 

Brett: Welcome back to the Art of Accomplishment, where we explore living the life you want with enjoyment and ease. Today we're going to talk about how to stop seeking the approval of others and speak your truth. We're going to talk about the three things that prevent people from speaking their truth.

We're going to talk about doubt. We're going to talk about the difference between intuition and patterning or conditioning. And we're going to offer some tips and practices to help you embody speaking your truth and letting go of the need for approval from others.

Hi, Joe. 

Joe: Hey, Brett. 

Brett: Something that's been popping up in the world around us is the question, how do we stop seeking approval and follow what's true for us? 

Joe: It's interesting, because I think that the question itself, the answer is reversed. Let me explain what I mean. So my daughters, both of them went through this at some point.

They're in their teenage years, and there's exclusion, and there's who likes who, and did you get invited to the party, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And at some point, both of my daughters realized that this is like a really painful experience. Trying to make sure that people like you, and trying to make sure that you're doing the right thing, and et cetera, et cetera, is hard.

And so recently my youngest came to me to talk to me about this and what to do and we had a discussion about it. And this realization hit her in our conversation, which was she didn't really have friends. If she had to present a certain way and do a certain thing and Be a certain person, she didn't have friends.

She had surrogate friends who are friends with somebody who she was trying to be, but it wasn't friends with who she was. And when she saw that was the main cause of the pain, her decision was, and I have to say with a lot of courage, that she was going to just speak her truth.

Just say the thing that was true to her. She wasn't going to try to game the system or worry about what somebody thought of her. She was just going to be, I would call it like self-possessed. She was just going to be like, oh, I'm going to be who I want to be in this situation and let the chips fall where they may.

And we talked about it a couple weeks later and what she recognized was that she was constantly looking for approval before, and when she started speaking her truth, she stopped looking for that approval. And the mechanism there is fascinating to me because if you speak your truth, then you're approving of yourself, and you don't have to go looking outside for it.

If you speak your truth, you say, this thing that I'm saying, this that I'm feeling, this perception of the world is valuable. I approve of it. I approve of it so much I'm going to speak it. I'm going to validate it. So I don't need to get validation outside. I don't need to get approval outside. And if you look around the world, you'll see that the people who aren't really looking for your approval are the people who are also not hedging what they say.

They're being self-possessed. They're looking for the truth. And the idea often is how do I stop looking for approval and speak my truth? But the reality is oftentimes it's speaking your truth that is the cure for seeking approval. 

Brett: I want to back up the train a little bit because there's all kinds of, all over self help world, there are posters with mountains and skydivers on them that say things like don't seek the approval of others, seek your truth or follow your truth. And it's like a moral prescription of this is obviously the optimal way of being, but what I'm just hearing is that your daughters the daughters of a teacher of speaking one's truth, 

Joe: Yeah, 

Brett: Were themselves not immune from going through this experience.

Joe: Oh, yeah We all have to so first of all fuck the morality of it one way feels better. It feels good and being conscientious of other people feels good. It's just abandoning what's true for you for other people's what doesn't feel good. But let's not do the moral prescription of it. 

Brett: Yeah, 

Joe: That's one thing.

And then the second thing is we are geared to be in tribes, right? We're geared to be in groups. And so there is a natural tension in our life of how do we fit in and how do we stand out? How do we fit in and how do we also be in our truth? This is a natural push and pull and in all societies, some bigger, some greater, America has more let me stand out and some societies have more let me fit in but generally that's where it comes from. There's a really normal strategy of it and I suspect that when you're in a really homogeneous group there's a certain sense of fulfillment of fitting in and going along and there's probably a correspondence in your conditioning and what you've learned to be right, et cetera, et cetera, that helps with that.

But in our society, where we're not very homogeneous anymore, you can find a group of people who will think anything's kosher or anything is not kosher. That's where it stems from. The other way to look at it is that there's a story of Buddha, which is very similar to the story of Jesus, goes out into the desert, Buddha sits under a tree, he gets the temptations, Buddha gets the temptations. One of the temptations was societal norms. This is what society thinks you should do, that's a temptation. It's natural, it's as natural as the temptation to be wealthy or be powerful or be wealthy and powerful to be safe. All of those are temptations. They're temptations because they feel good in the moment. There's a quick fix to them, but it's not a really long-term solution. 

Brett: I think especially early in life, it seems that there is a developmental gradient from, 

Joe: Correct. 

Brett: external reference to internal reference. 

Joe: Exactly. Yeah, especially the first eight years. Yeah, but what's even interesting about it, if you look at the first eight years, there's this external reference, but there's also this deep connection with what they want.

So they can do both. It lets you see that the idea, even the idea that there's an external connection and an internal connection, is a construction and we live it. We've all had the experience of being outwardly focused or inwardly focused, but you can be both. And when you are, then that's very much, you'll notice that you'll be following your truth and you'll be attuned to other people.

Both important, both good feelings, yeah. 

Brett: Every temper tantrum is the mixing of the internal, external, to begin with. 

Joe: Maybe not everyone, but a lot of them, yeah. 

Brett: A lot of them. 

That brings up the question of so you've flipped it around from following your truth, speaking your truth is the thing that has the external need for validation fall away because you are validating yourself.

Joe: Correct. 

Brett: Now, how would you know that what you're perceiving as your truth is, say, intuition or conditioning, or that it's even yours? 

Joe: Interestingly, somatically, often when you're speaking your truth, it doesn't feel like yours. It feels more like channeling or following your call or something like that.

There's a felt sense of surrender in it, almost. This is way down the line but there's this feeling of surrender to it because following that call, speaking that truth, being in that surrender to the experience, to do anything else is just painful. You've done it so many times that you realize, oh, that's the thing and I need to do it.

So that's one thing about it that's interesting is that it doesn't feel like yours. It actually, when you're doing this, it naturally puts you in a space where the self, the strong identity, the identity that you have to defend starts to disintegrate. And then there's the question of, am I having an immediate reaction because I'm following my truth and that's intuition? Or am I having an immediate reaction and that's conditioning and it's going to throw me into that shithole pattern that I've thrown myself into a dozen times? And what I notice is that it's a somatic experience to find that out, it's not an intellectual one. And so my recommendation to most people is just every time you make an immediate decision, pay attention to your body and see what the difference is between the two. For me my experience is that my heart closes down if I'm in conditioning, if I'm in unhealthy conditioning. Some conditioning is great, by the way, right? I want to be conditioned not to drink hot coffee that's too damn hot. And that doesn't make me close down my heart when I test to see that my coffee is hot or not hot or whatever, but when I'm in a pattern of say rebelling against authority when I was 28 years old, man, my heart had to close down.

Brett: Yeah, 

Joe: if I'm in a pattern of reacting to somebody the way I've reacted to people when I felt abandoned, my heart has to close down. 

Brett: That's an interesting pointer, the somatic, checking the somatics of it. Because if I'm speaking something that later turns out to perhaps be something I would define as like the wisdom that came through me in the moment, most likely, there's a vulnerability and openness to it. Maybe even a bewilderment of, did I just say that? Is that what I really feel here? Is that what I think? Is this the stand I want to take? And that's a very different thing from if I'm channeling, say, the internalized morality of my tribe, in which case it feels a lot more like the shield and the spear in front of a phalanx of warriors behind me and I'm like, oh, yeah this is true.

It's a very different somatic experience and constriction. 

Joe: You have to defend. That's right. The amazing thing is that oftentimes when I'm working with clients and they're talking about how to speak their truth, one of the things that I notice is that somatically, oftentimes at the beginning, there's a pucker to it.

Oh my God, am I going to say that? That's usually like a great moment to know, oh yeah, that's the thing to say. It's not like a huge, oh my God, fear thing. It's not like you deregulate yours or dysregulate. It's just that little bit of a pucker. 

Brett: That might be the first available sensation that you get is that I'm feeling resistance. I'm feeling the pucker. 

Joe: That's right. 

Brett: What's under that? What's coming through in that? 

Joe: It's a very similar feeling to walking out on stage in front of a hundred people. 

Brett: Yeah. 

Joe: Oh my gosh. Am I gonna do this? The other thing is that when I see people speak their truth, oftentimes the beginning of it's very bumpy, and one of the things that I teach them is, okay, really somatically make sure your heart is open.

The other thing to say about the truth is that there's something incredibly misleading about your truth. A baby wants to get a cup of water and their truth is to crawl one time and then a little bit later their truth is to walk, right? So it's not about like truth is in this is true and there's never a time when it's not. 

To speak your truth is like I said, it's like a channeling. There's something about it that's very nonpersonal and you can feel it as nonpersonal and it's actually one of the cool things is when you are doing that on a regular basis when this is your practice, One of the things that starts to happen is that you stop taking things personally. Because you're seeing that what's happening in your world isn't particularly personal. It's more of a calling, so to speak. It's a really interesting practice because it unfolds like a meditation. How you meditate on day one is very different than how you meditate ten years in, and it opens up a lot of doors. This practice is the same way. Oh, I have that calling. I know my heart is open. I am in myself. This is what I'm meant to say, even if I'm scared to say it, despite the consequences. 

I think I've told this story about one of the things that we've done raising our girls is that we're constantly having them reference themselves. We don't say, good job. You're smart. They say, look at what I did. And oh yeah, what'd you feel about that? Oh, it feels so good. We're constantly like having them reflect on their own experience because we have a trust in that, that their own experience is going to lead them better than what we think. We obviously there's some stuff you got to do as a parent to hold boundaries, etc.

It's the same thing when I'm working with clients. It's a perpetual deconstructing of the thought process so they can see themselves. It's such an interesting thing of how do you become self-referential when you're born self-referential? It's such a weird bit. Yeah. 

Brett: It's like coming back around to the initial place on the circle.

Joe: Yeah. 

Brett: You start self-referential, but self-referential in reference to what like you do have an environment. You do have a social world, 

Joe: Yeah, 

Brett: But ultimately looping that back to what do I feel? How does doubt show up in reference to our truth? 

Joe: Yeah, so I was working with a client recently, super successful alcoholic father like me and learned that every time dad got mad, she could not get mad back. So the only act of control, of sovereignty she could have was to say, what did I do wrong?

And I can't tell you, I think it's at least 60 percent of the people work this way. Somebody gets mad at them either aggressively mad at them or passively aggressively mad at them and they go, what did I do wrong? 

Brett: I've been seeing this a lot lately. Yeah. 

Joe: Oh, yeah, and so that's doubt and by the way doubt requires a closed heart So close down your heart the anger should be going outward because you should be like fuck you, Dad. What the fuck like I'm your kid don't do this to me, but you can't do that as a five-year-old. So you say what did I do wrong anger goes inward you start beating yourself up and that's the doubt or you start questioning yourself. If you're the other kind, where someone gets mad at you and that immediately makes you angry, that's the other form of it. I fall more into that category. Then you rationalize and you justify. 

Brett: It's interesting, the former there is also, there's something interesting in the personal nonpersonalness of it. Because, if I am to blame, it's easy to see that as I'm just looking for what's going on, so I'm self-referencing.

Joe: Correct. 

Brett: I'm referencing what I've done wrong, whatever I did wrong to deserve this. 

Joe: Correct. You don't even see it that clearly usually you're just like what did I do wrong? I shouldn't have done this blah blah blah blah most people don't even hook it to the fact that oh someone yelled at me and that's why I do this. If you're listening to this and you have a problem with self-doubt just notice is there ever been any time that somebody has yelled at you and you haven't gone into doubt? How many times can you literally point at somebody who's been aggressive towards you or passive-aggressive towards you and you're like, yeah, I didn't do anything wrong? That's them. I love asking clients that, blows their mind. What? Wait, and they can't find it. They can't find one single time. So apparently, anytime anybody's gotten mad at you, it's your fault, right? That has a lot to do with oh, I'm trying to make sure that people are happy. And the reason that doubt is so prevalent there is because you can't fucking make people happy. So there's always a reason to doubt. You can always fucking churn. You can always go, no, that's not the right decision. Maybe this, maybe I shouldn't have done it this way. Because somebody's always gonna be fucking unhappy with you. Always. And the same person may be unhappy with you if you do number A thing and the next day you do A thing and they're happy with you and the next day you do A thing and they're unhappy with you because that's how humans are. They're happy because mostly because their own shit not because of what you're doing. 

Brett: Yeah and the funny thing is that becomes especially true if that person is doing a whole bunch of complicated game theory to reference a bunch of other people for what they need in their life so that what they think they need is changing from moment to moment based on 30 other people. And it tends to happen less when interacting with a person who is really deeply self-referencing. 

Joe: Correct. 

Brett: They tend to appear more consistent and there's a level of consistency that develops over time which increases people's trust with them and increases their capacity to lead. 

Joe: Correct, definitely on the leadership side And the other thing it does is it makes the folks around them be more consistent. If you're volatile people around you are on eggshells, and so they're very inconsistent. If you're following your truth, and there's a groundedness to you that makes it so that people lean in and trust you.

And so the doubt comes in because you're referencing outside. The three main reasons that people are not following their truth is one, doubt, two, fear of the consequences, and three, because they're justifying conditioning. They're justifying a bad pattern and calling it truth, right? Those are the things that seem to happen.

And in the doubt side of it, It's a lack of self-referencing, and in the result-oriented, oh, I'm scared of the results, that one's interesting, because most people are thinking about a decision as a single decision. They're thinking about it as a single bet, and it's the whole world is on that bet, instead of seeing it as a portfolio of decisions.

If I'm investing and I'm like thinking about my investment as one investment, I am far less likely to be successful at it as if I'm thinking about it as a portfolio and I know I'm going to have some wins and I know I'm going to have some losses. So with my daughter, she had some losses because some of the things she said didn't go well or somebody got upset.

But the overall result, the portfolio was good. The portfolio was solid. And oftentimes what I hear people say is I made a bad decision and you ask what makes that the case, because the results weren't good. That doesn't make any damn sense to me. Because, put yourself at a different company with a different boss, and that decision would have been great results.

Brett: It's another way of saying, I failed to predict the future, because I hold myself responsible for predicting the future. Which, if you're looking at investing, and markets, if you try to predict the future, you're screwed.

But what you can do is create a system, a process, a portfolio that has contingencies and that is likely to lead to better outcomes over time.

And so in the realm of doubt, it was about going from the external reference to building a deeper internal reference. In this case, it's going from focus on consequences and outcomes, to focus on process. 

Joe: Yeah, it's the same thing at its core, which is say what's true for you. The thing is the same.

The hurdle to get there is different. And the way to overcome that hurdle is to look at the process and say, okay, I understand that if I do this regularly and enough that the world will move itself to meet me. Same with my daughter, the world moved itself to say, oh, you are now self-possessed, we will treat you as such, or you are now loving yourself. So we're going to surround you with people who love you. The world does react to how we are. And so the world will create something for you that supports your truth. It's not magic and it's not magical thinking it's just as simple as if you treat a dog one way they're going to react differently than if you treat a dog another way. If you treat your friend group one way they're going to react different.

Brett: That's an interesting segue to number three because if we're talking about the process rather than the outcomes Then what process do we adopt? 

Joe: Be grounded and open-hearted and it's really hard. It will hurt you not to speak your truth. You will feel the pain of it. You listen to that person, you're like, Ooh, man, they just spoke some truth. You feel that shit in your body. 

Brett: For those listening who want to develop a practice, or want to take a little homework from this episode 

Joe: Yeah. 

Brett: into their lives to seek less approval and trust themselves more. What are a couple of things that people could do? 

Joe: The simple thing is to have the practice of speaking your truth, even if it's uncomfortable, and make it just a little bit uncomfortable two times a day.

Brett: Two times a day I jump in there and I drop the grenade and I run? Or what do I do with it? 

Joe: You can't do that if your heart is open and you're grounded. 

Brett: Ah. 

Joe: Say the thing that's scary. It would not feel good to run. You'd have to shut that all down to run under most circumstances. You can't intellectually get there.

There's a somatic component that is required. Can I be fully in myself with an open heart, undefended, and say what I have to say? And if I do, and I don't defend, and I stay grounded, what's going to happen? If you do that enough times, it becomes really apparent when you aren't and when you are. And the other thing that you can do is, when you make an immediate decision, notice how your body feels.

And so you'll start noticing, oh, is that intuition, or is that patterning? Is that negative patterning? There's, like I said, there's lots of conditioning that's great, but is this conditioning that throws me in negative patterns? There would be a very specific felt sense to it. And so you can feel that when that's happening, and you can speak your truth two times a day, make it simple stuff. Just keep on going bigger and bigger. 

Brett: And what would you add for somebody who says, I have a hard time feeling myself. Especially when I'm in that situation, I close down and I can't feel anything. 

Joe: You're fucked.

No, I wouldn't say that. I would say then your first job is to learn how to feel your body. Walk around for the next two weeks, keeping 10 percent of your attention in your body. And if you're like, I can't feel my body, smack yourself on the face and feel your cheek. Tap your fingers together and feel your fingers. You can feel your body, everybody can. That's like saying, how do I see? Unless you're blind, you can see. Spend time keeping 10 percent of your attention in your body as much as possible for two, three weeks. By the way, that can be an incredibly intense trip for people, so be gentle with yourself if you do that.

Brett: Part of me wants to ask a question about weaponization, like, how do we not walk away from this and weaponize the concept? Like I am just speaking my truth and not recognize we're in like a deeply defensive state around it or, to your partner, why aren't you just speaking your truth? Stop being so approval-seeking, 

Joe: Right?

Brett: What have you seen with clients working through this? And some of the pitfalls that they might get into?

Joe: You got to close your heart to do any of that stuff again, you've got to close your heart. It can be totally weaponized. I know there's this thing called radical honesty, which I really appreciate but there's a way you can take radical honesty to a point where you are just being abusive to people. And I'm speaking my truth, despite the consequences, is something. I'm speaking my truth. In a way with a closed heart and it hurts people is something else. Sometimes you speak your truth with an open heart and people are going to get hurt. But when they are hurt, if they are like, you see it, you're like, oh, whoa, I didn't want to hurt you. That's not what I was meant to do here. Then your truth will be like, let's prioritize connection. 

Brett: Awesome. 

Joe: Awesome. 

Brett: Thank you, Joe. 

Joe: Pleasure, Brett. Thank you. 

Brett: Yeah. Thank you everybody for listening to the Art of Accomplishment.

If you enjoyed what you heard today, please share it with a friend. And of course, please follow us and rate us in your podcast app. The Art of Accomplishment was produced and hosted by myself, Brett Kistler, and Joe Hudson. Mun Yee Kelly is our production coordinator and Reasonable Volume edited this episode.

Joe: Bada bing, bada boom.

Brett: Bada boom.