Most people think that the key to success is being more disciplined, working harder, and getting more done. And that stuff actually does get you into the top 10 20% of most fields. But if you really want to get into the top 1% or even the top.1%, then the rules completely change. This video is about those new rules, the success habits of the top.1%. And I learned them from this guy, Joe Hudson. He's the secret coach that the biggest companies in Silicon Valley, including Apple and Google and Open AI, pay absolutely insane amounts of money to help their CEOs and executive teams level up and stay ahead of the competition. Now, I discovered Joe's work about a year ago, and I binged everything he's put out online. And then I had the privilege of attending his invite only in-person intensive retreat, and I haven't really talked about it on the channel until now, but Joe's work has completely transformed my own life, and I hope that it can do the same for you as well. Now, final thing before we start, a quick warning. This is going to be a really long video and you are going to be tempted to skip ahead and look at the timestamps in the comments and see if anyone has summarized the video in a tweetable bite-sized fashion. And I get it. I'm all about trying to learn stuff efficiently. But the habits that we're going to talk about in this video are not simple productivity hacks that you can just read the timestamp for and then think, "Cool. Yep. I already knew that." The stuff in this video is deeper stuff than what I normally talk about on this channel. And what you might be used to if you watch videos about productivity or success. In fact, I can pretty much guarantee that even if, like me, you are a connoisseur of self-improvement content, you have not yet mastered a single one of these five habits. I also guarantee that if you do apply these habits into your life, you'll become drastically more successful by whatever metric you decide matters to you. But also, more importantly, you'll experience much more joy and fulfillment along the way. All right, let's dive into the first habit. Now, most people when we are faced with a new project or a goal, most of us believe that the path to success involves meticulous planning and endless research and waiting until everything is perfect. We often get stuck at that point and we are afraid to start because there's all these other things we might want to do and we don't want to make the wrong move. But actually the really successful people, the top.1% in Joe's experience, they become much more successful when they focus on something entirely different. Yeah. So every successful CEO I know cares more about the pace of the company than they do about getting anything perfect. They have a very iterative mindset. And so what that means is that um I don't care if we make mistakes. I don't care if we um get it right as long as we're actually moving forward. This is worth emphasizing. I don't care if we get it right as long as we are actually moving forward. And this is the opposite to how most of us think. We tend to fixate on getting it right rather than moving it forward. And the reason that this is the case is because it's really hard to steer a ship that doesn't move. The other reason is because if you're doing the forward momentum, then you have an iterative cycle. It means that you're actually changing the way you do things based on reflection, based on how the customer reacts, based on how the world reacts, and therefore you learn quicker. Whereas, if you're doing that all through a mental model, you learn a lot slower. Now, we're starting with this point because this is something that most people I know who are trying to become rich or successful or financially free or whatever, most people need to hear this. You can in fact just do things. You don't need to wait until you are perfectly prepared to do the thing. And in fact, instead of waiting until you're like 80 or 90 or 100% prepared, start taking action with like 20% preparation and focus on habit one, which is the iterative mindset. You start with a small amount of prep. You do the thing and then you get data that allows you to improve the thing over time. And the way Joe describes it is that it's about prioritizing pace over perfection. The pace is more important because you learn quicker and because you have movement and you can steer your ship more accurately. So that's why pace is important. It doesn't mean that you want to get everything wrong, but it it does mean that you care more about doing it than doing it perfectly. There's actually the title of a book that I really like titled Ready, Fire, Aim, and that is really this iterative mindset habit in action. And so, if you ask yourself, to what extent do you operate with an iterative mindset? To what extent do you focus on taking action and then figuring things out? or are you one of those people like most people are who gets stuck in analysis paralysis, who gets stuck in overthinking and you have all these things you could do but you're not actually taking action on any of them. And because this is such a common struggle, this is something that I asked Joe next. I asked, "Why do we stay stuck in research mode rather than taking action?" Um, there's a couple of reasons, but I think that the the the easiest way to see through it is that you're still in research mode. You're still researching how to do great videos. You're still like you're the research has never stopped. The only difference is that the research is now more public that you can be seen in your research. And so which is what tells you why most people don't want to do it is because they don't want to make mistakes publicly. But there is no CEO who hasn't made public mistakes. So that's just part of the deal. It's part and parcel. This is worth emphasizing. Most people don't take action because they are afraid of making mistakes publicly. This is something I used to really struggle with. I had to get over it eight years ago when I first started my YouTube channel because obviously making these silly internet videos is literally all about being okay with making mistakes publicly. And there was one quote that I came across around that time that really helped. It's a quote apparently from Epictitus who was one of the ancient Greek philosophers. And the quote was something like if you want to improve be content to be thought foolish and stupid. Most of us are so afraid to be thought foolish and stupid by the people around us, by our friends, our family, our co-workers, our managers, that we stay stuck in these situations that we don't like just to avoid the feeling of being judged. Now, one way of dealing with this, which is what really worked for me when I first started making these videos, is to remind yourself that no one thinks about you as much as you worry they do. Everyone has their own lives. Everyone's doing their own thing. And so, whatever that thing is that you're struggling to do right now because you're worried about what everyone will think, don't worry. They're not thinking about you anyway. They're just way too busy. But Joe actually has a different way of dealing with this fear. And that brings us on to the heart of his teachings. And that brings us on to habit number two. All right. So we talked about this iterative mindset, but the reason we struggle with this is because when we think about potential failure or making mistakes, we generally try to avoid those situations at all costs. We either suppress our fear or we try to power through it with like willpower or something or we just avoid taking the risks altogether, which is where most people are. But according to Joe, the really successful people, the top 0.1%, these people understand that the key is not avoiding failure, but fundamentally changing their relationship with the internal experience that failure triggers. Now, the caveat here is that this is going to be a very long point and this is the heart of Joe's teachings, but I promise if you stick with this and you engage with the idea and you maybe explore more of Joe's content if you want to learn more, this is an idea that completely changed my life and I think has the potential to change yours as well. The question is, what's making us care about that? And it's the emotional response. If I told you, hey, you're gonna make a whole bunch of mistakes in your business. But at the end of the day, you're not going to care. You're going to feel great about every mistake you made, then making a mistake is not such a problem. But if I tell you you're going to make mistakes, you're going to feel embarrassed. You're going to feel miserable. You're going to think you're a failure. And then you're just going to fall off a cliff and say, "Fuck it. I'm never doing this again." Well, then you're going to care, but not because you made the mistakes, because of how it made you feel. So the key point here is that it's not actually the judgment or the criticism or the failure that we're afraid of. We are actually afraid of the feeling, the internal state, the internal emotion that failure might bring up within us. Now this is very natural. So first we're going to explain why it happens and then we're going to talk about what you can do about it. Oh and quick thing. If you happen to be in one of the large number of people who follow this channel who are or who want to be creators, then I would love for you to check out Spotter Studio who are very kindly sponsoring today's video. Now, as you might know, if you're a creator, this whole thing of coming up with fresh content ideas week after week is honestly one of the hardest parts about being a creator and being a YouTuber. And that's why me and my team have been using Spotter Studio, which is this incredible AI powered platform specifically designed for YouTube creators like us. And it's basically changed our entire ideation process. And actually incorporating Spotter Studio into our workflow each week not only saves me time, but it also saves my team time and also helps us come up with much more creative ideas. Now, what I personally love about Spotter Studio is that it combines datadriven insight with AI powered brainstorming tools. So, that helps us generate new video concepts, but it also gives us a sense of which ideas are most likely to resonate with our audience. One of my favorite features is the new idea bank, which is the best place to save all of your YouTube video ideas. And this lets me quickly capture and organize and prioritize ideas with Spotter AI support. And they've also just launched ideas for you, which gives you five fresh datadriven video ideas personalized to your channel and your audience every day. They've also got the idea canvas beta which is this free form whites space where you can brainstorm hundreds of new ideas and it's perfect if you are a visual thinker like me and you can choose to start from scratch or you can use their AI powered tools to see hundreds of title and thumbnail and hook ideas within minutes. Now honestly trying to come up with and researching video ideas is my least favorite part of the creator process. But spotter studio has made that so much easier which means I can focus more on actually crafting the video which is the bit that I personally enjoy and trying to make the content as good as possible for my wonderful audience. So, if you are a creator who wants to take a more datadriven approach to your content strategy, then you can check out Spotter Studio using the link in the video description. They offer a 7-day free trial, and they're constantly adding new features and tools to help creators like us make better content that really connects with our audiences hopefully. So, thank you, Spotter Studio, for sponsoring the video. And let's get back to it. We have a structure in our brain called the habenula. And the habenula is it's kind of like the switchboard of the brain between the front and the back. loosely speaking, some some some neuroscientist is gonna have a field day with that. But one of the things it does, it says, "You failed. I don't want you to fail again." Because if I'm a tiger and I just fought for dominance and I've lost, I shouldn't go fight for dominance again. Or if I'm a a fish and I just ate something poisonous, I don't want to go and eat that thing again. And so that's what the heula is built to do. All right. So it's been a while since I studied neuroscience in medical school, so I had to look this up. Basically deep inside our brains near the center there is this tiny region called the habenula that acts kind of like an anti-reward or disappointment center of the brain and neuroscientists have found that the herbula becomes particularly active when things don't go as expected when a reward that we anticipated doesn't arrive or when we experience some kind of negative outcome. The herbenula then it like it feels this failure and then it sends out signal to the other parts of the brain the parts of the brain involved in motivation and it tells it to suppress motivation for the thing and this particularly involves the neurotransmitter dopamine. Now at the risk of massively oversimplifying this we can think of dopamine as the motivation molecule and so when the herbenula dampens down dopamine after this negative experience it biologically reduces our drive or our motivation to repeat that action whatever action led to that outcome. And this is a very useful survival mechanism like you know if you step on a thorn and it hurts it tells you don't step on that thorn again. But in the modern world where trying to become top 1% or top.1% successful requires you to take risks and run the risks of experiencing failure. It's a very very unhelpful biological survival mechanism that we have. So the key point here is that firstly if you do find that you like everyone else work very hard to avoid failure then don't worry. This is very normal and it's literally what our brains are designed to do. But if you do care about being in the top 0.1% of people, however you personally want to define that, then it's obviously very ideal if we can get over that fear. And this is where Joe's teachings really deviate from traditional productivity advice. And so one way out is to really fall in love with the emotional state, whether it's success or failure. And so what I see a lot of uh or uh so a tool that I use a lot with people is take your time to really visualize your success over and over again and feel everything you have to feel with that. Take your time to see your failure. and visualize that. Feel all you have to feel in that and then the action becomes really clear. It becomes really easy to do. Hold up. Fall in love with the emotional state. What the hell is this guy talking about? Now, I first heard this stuff like 18 months ago when I first discovered Joe's teachings. And initially, the 20some tech bro within me was like, obviously, this is total BS. Like, emotions and internal sensations and feelings. This is all clearly And I was thinking, man, this guy's such a scammer. like I can't believe these billionaire CEOs and founders and these sort of executive teams of these massive companies. I can't believe this guy is scamming them out of so much money. But then I decided, okay, let me take a step back. Let me think about this. These companies, these really big companies are probably not like idiots. And so there's probably some kind of value in this guy's teachings. And then I happened to meet Joe on some event that I went to and I was like, "Oh, this guy's actually really nice and he's very warm and he's very friendly and he gives really good advice and he works one-on-one with Sam Alman." the founder of Twitter literally said that Joe Hudson changed his life and he coaches the open AI team and he's worked with all these teams of these companies whose products I use and love every day. I decided, you know what, let me have an open mind and let me see what I can learn from him. I started absorbing all the teachings in the content. I took a couple of Joe's online courses. I got invited to his in-person retreat and this emotion stuff has ended up transforming my own life and my productivity and my relationship with my wife. And at these different events, I have met insanely successful people including literal billionaires, i.e. people with a net worth of over $1,000 million. and their lives have been transformed by this kind of work as well. So, this would be my public service announcement to my former self or people like me before we continue with this video, which is dude, you have to take this stuff seriously. Emotions are literally the heart of all of the decisions that you make about your work, your business, your life, your relationships. And if you actually care about being in the top 1% of performers, or even if you don't give a about that and you just want to live a happier, more fulfilled, more peaceful life, I'd really, really, really recommend taking this stuff seriously. How do we learn to love the emotional state associated with like a negative emotion? Like if I if if if I do the thing and the thing fails, I will feel bad and shame and like uh sadness and like that everyone's judging me and stuff that that seems hard to love love that state. Yeah. So typically the thing that's hard to love about an emotion is the resistance to the emotion, not the emotion itself. So sadness feels very different if you don't want to be sad and you're sad than if you want to be sad and you're sad. They're very different experiences. So the first thing is to work on the resistances that prevent you from actually feeling the state in its complete form instead of in this resistive form. So for example, if I don't want to be sad and I am actually sad and then I'm resisting the sadness because I don't want to be sad, then that feels really bad. But alternatively, and you might have had this experience, if I'm like, you know what, I'm sad and I'm going to experience the sadness. I'm going to luxuriate in the sadness. I'm going to put on some sad music and I'm going to like cry and I'm going to watch a depressing thing on YouTube. And actually, you know, when you luxuriate in the feeling rather than resisting the feeling, it doesn't really feel bad. It actually feels kind of good. And so really, it's the resistance to the emotion that creates the uncomfortable sensation, often not really the emotion itself. So that's one of the things. Two is just get very curious about the state. Every emotional state has a signal for you. If you're angry, it probably means there's a boundary. If you're anxious, it means there's probably some way you're not caring for yourself. If you're sad, it means that there's something that has been true about you that you don't want to have true about you anymore. And there's some there's some way in which you're being asked to transform. All those things are great signals. And so you can really look forward to them once you understand what the signals are. And when you look forward to them, the other thing that's less likely to happen is you're less likely to be taken by them and thrown around and tossed like you're in a dishwasher or a washer and dryer because it's the resistance that makes it a really heavy experience. So, a really easy way to do this is to when you have your next emotional experience, instead of running into your phone, oh my god, I don't want to feel this or however you do it, running into a YouTube video. The other way to do it is to stop and get really curious about how exactly it feels in your body. Where exactly is it? How high is it? How low is it? How dense is it? Where's the center? How's the center different than the outside? all sorts of questions like that so that you can really be curious about it the way like a little kid would pick up a frog and go, "Oh, what's going on there?" It's the same thing. You do that with an emotion. And pretty soon you'll realize that the emotion isn't that scary. And there's it's actually just a set of sensations that is far less painful than I don't know getting like hit in the elbow, you know? It's like they do they just pass and they change and they're they're actually quite amazing. All right. So, this has been one of the realizations, as I said, that has most changed my life. It's the recognition firstly that emotions are underlying and driving everything. And even though I like to think of myself as a logical guy, often the most difficult problems or decisions I'm dealing with or that we're dealing with, they can't really be thought through. Like, you can't really analyze them if there is an underlying emotion underneath that we are not acknowledging or feeling. And then when I learned to actually feel the feelings, which is something I'm getting better at over time, the second step was recognizing that actually at the end of the day, an emotion is just a series of internal bodily sensations, usually accompanied by some kind of mental story. It's a series of sensations that arises and passes away. And so what what is the thing that I'm actually afraid of? And so I asked Joe what his origin story was and how he came to this realization. So, uh, one of the most acute experiences is I got kicked out of a house for something that wasn't my fault when I was, um, younger, like early 30s. And I noticed every time I drove by the house, it just felt like getting kicked in the stomach. And I got really curious, like, what is that? Like, why? I didn't do anything wrong. I know I didn't do anything wrong. What what the heck is that thing? So, I would drive past the house on purpose so I could feel that thing. And I just got more and more curious because it it just was strictly wonder. It was like what the hell is going on here? Like what makes this so? And and what I did in that experience was just really get curious about it, learn to enjoy it. And then the more I enjoyed it, the less it showed up. So I was like, "Oh my gosh, like this is getting rid of it. This is fantastic. Like I don't feel that thing anymore." And then as soon as I was doing it to get rid of it, it came back. And then I realized, oh right, if I actually love the emotional experiences, it changes. If I love it to get rid of it, it doesn't change because that's not really loving it. And so in that experience, I realized, oh, that that phrase, what we resist persists. I was just like, oh, right, I don't have to resist these emotional experiences. And then I looked around and I said, wow, all my bad habits are resisting an emotional experience. They're all to not feel something. And they're all avoidance of some emotion. All my bad decisions are based on on trying not to feel a certain way. I don't want to feel like too much of a success, tall poppy. I don't want to feel like a failure. Like wow, I just noticed everything around me was based on these emotions. And then a little bit later after that, I read a book called uh Dart's Error. And Dart's error is a neuroscientist who literally talks about how our decisions are made in the emotional center of the body. that if I took that away from you, your IQ would be the same, but you would fail to make decisions. It would take you half an hour to two hours to decide like where to eat lunch and so your whole life would fall apart and that it's actually our emotions that are driving the decision-m and then I was just absolutely clear. I couldn't ever make a logical decision, but what I could do is make an emotional decision without the fear of feeling some way. And then that that just clarified everything. And there's modern psychology that backs up this kind of stuff as well. So for example in the field of psychology there is a branch of therapy called act acceptance and commitment therapy. And ACT kind of emphasizes that when you are trying to suppress or fight difficult feelings paradoxically that actually makes them stronger and it consumes huge amounts of mental energy. Whereas if we go for acceptance of the feeling which starts with curiosity as Joe described that lets the emotion be processed by the body and it passes naturally. And so the analogy I find helpful is that if the emotion is kind of like a wave, you stop like resisting the wave and you instead just sort of surrender to the wave or like surf on the wave or whatever. Someone might be thinking it's not just the feeling, it's that there would be very real consequences to me doing the thing. For example, as a professional, if I stop posting on LinkedIn, there's the very real risk that my colleagues will laugh at me and then dot dot dot like I'll be viewed less favorably by my peers, my salary would go down dot dot dot. I've I'm not trying to avoid a feeling. I'm trying to avoid real life consequences of acting without thinking. Yeah. So, I'm not suggesting not to act without thinking. Obviously, I'm not suggesting that. But what I am suggesting is if let's take the worst case scenario, you go homeless. And if you knew for sure that if you went homeless, you would be happier, more content, feel more alive, feel a sense of bliss and joy that was unrivaled on a regular basis. What happens to your fear of going homeless? Like what's the what's the problem all of a sudden? So you can tell how much of its decision is being made emotionally. The other way to really understand it is how many missions I'm sorry, how many decisions have you made to uh feel awesome or to feel like a winner or to not feel like a loser or to not get rejected or to not have feel guilty. Like if you just look at your life that way, it's really hard to look at any decision that isn't made emotionally. And and then you say, "Well, where does logic come in?" And well, you build bridges with logic. That's great. But also, you're using logic to find out how you're going to feel. Oh, if I do X, Y, and Z, then I will have a successful business and then I will feel good. That's the way it goes. And so, you watch these people and they have a really successful business and they're 50 years old and they're miserable as and it's because that what was actually happening was their logic was flawed. the thing that actually would make them happy wasn't a successful business or it might have been a successful business run in a way that was more heartfelt or whatever it is. I realized that for me a lot of the decisions I make around my business or my work or my YouTube channel or my you know whether to rush on writing my next book I like to think that I'm approaching these decisions logically and so I'll write out all these like logical thought patterns about like what the best decision is. But really, if I acknowledge the underlying fear, the underlying emotion behind these, it's a fear of going broke. It's a fear of running out of money and ending up broke and homeless and stuff. And this is not a particularly rational fear. And I have met people with net worths that are 10, 100, a thousand times higher than mine. And a lot of them also have this fear of running out of money and ending up homeless. But then when I imagine, okay, cool. So let's say in this world I end up with no money and I'm broke and I'm homeless. But let's say hypothetically I'm at peace with it. I am, you know, I'm I'm super blissful. I'm tranquil all the time. I'm absolutely loving life. I've got a little backpack with my little tent and I just sort of walk around the wilderness and stuff. In that world, the fear of running out of money actually goes away. And so, the conclusion that I draw from that is that it's not the actual fact of running out of money that I'm really worried about. It's I'm worried about experiencing the feeling of running out of money, which I perceive to be a negative feeling. And then I'm thinking like, no, I'm going to do everything I can to avoid this feeling at all costs. and not even acknowledging the feeling. And then I end up stuck in these patterns thinking that I'm logically solving what to do with my business. But really, I just haven't accepted that there is this underlying fear beneath it. So, let's say you're working with one of these like billionaire CEO type people. Um, what and and like are they having this realization as well? Is this like news to them that the decisions are emotional and they can be okay with the emotions? Like how how does that how does that play out in like a coaching session or if you're working with with a team? Yeah. So typically people um they don't buy into it right away. Typically people are like wait my emotions are something that I'm supposed to control or that control me and I'm supposed to manage them. And so it's not until they actually get the power of it until they actually see oh when I approach my feelings this way I get clarity a lot quicker. When I allow myself to feel the feeling I then know what to do. And so most people have had an experience of either say like crying I think is the most common experience. I'm feeling really shitty. I cry and I feel better. So if you've allowed yourself to cry, you're going to realize that emotional experience actually creates clarity on the other side of it. And it doesn't create clarity the way logic creates clarity, which is, you know, a plus b equals c. Emotions create clarity like this. Ah, that's how emotions work. They don't make any sense, but when they move through you, you all of a sudden have a sense of clarity. As soon as a good CEO sees that, immediately they're like, "Okay, I'm in." because that that's another avenue to get to clarity. And I know that the clearer I am, the more my pace is going to be, the easier the pace because decisiveness is part of what decides pace and the more that I know I'm going to be in the right direction. All right, so at this point, if you are still watching and you haven't switched off because of all this nonsense about emotions, then firstly, thank you. I hope you are getting value from the video so far. And to be honest, me a few years ago would have not even remotely bothered trying to engage with a video like this. I would have switched off a long time ago. But I genuinely think my life would have been more peaceful and tranquil. And I probably would have been more productive and also ironically made more money if I had embraced these emotions and the underlying fears behind the decisions I was making if I'd embraced that stuff earlier in life. But oh well, no time like the present. You know, the whole best time to plant a tree was 10 years ago. The second best time is now. So yeah, I just wanted to say a big thank you for being here. And if you feel like dropping a like or a comment on this video, then hopefully it will signal to the algorithm that there is some good content in here and hopefully then more people will see it. Okay. So, if I am in the throws of a decision and my my default way of approaching it is to just do a lot of journaling and to try and write out the logical thought process to make the decision and then I end up in this still with the same decision for like 3 to 6 months and I'm like yes what's up with that. Yeah. So that again that's a very much an emotional. So we have this course called the great decisions course and what we're doing in every day of that course is learning to explore the emotions that we're trying to avoid. So typically what's happening if you are indecisive and you're doing a whole bunch of SWAT analysises and you can't figure out what it is is there is one or more emotions that you are avoiding and if you actually go into them then there is nothing to avoid anymore. And the most the most um palpable exploration of this was done by the samurai and by the stoics and by the Tibetan book of living and dying because so many people one of the things they don't want to feel is death. One of the things that they're scared of is is death. And so all of these traditions what they do is they visualize the entire experience of death up until death and then after death full decomposition. and they feel every single part of that experience and the result is they they don't fear death anymore that they actually aren't controlled by that fear and that's a perfect experience of how what's happening. So whatever it is that you're not deciding there's an emotional experience that if you live through it enough times the fear goes away and you'll clearly the decision will make itself really. As a matter of fact, the other thing I would say is if you're having a hard time making a decision, what's absolutely guaranteed is that you're in fear because you make a hundred choices a day. You just made a choice to touch your keyboard. You're making a choice to hang out with me. All of those are choices that you make. But decisions are ones where you go, "Hold on a second. I got to really think this through." Which means immediately we know that there's fear involved. I'm scared of a potential consequence here. And so if you feel through that consequence, then the decision makes itself. just like all the rest of your decisions. One one tool I use I often use when it comes to to decisions is I just Google Tim Ferrris fear setting exercise where he's got this blog post that's like you know what's the worst case scenario how bad is it really like what would you do in that in that context but one thing he doesn't say in that blog post which I should sort of add as an addendum to myself whenever I do this is like what's the worst case scenario okay now really visualize and feel the feelings of that word worst case scenario rather than just typing it out on like a notion doc correct because the the the thing that fear fear does this fear does two things in the brain. The first one it does is it makes us think binary. So it's either if I'm scared it's either I'm going to buy the car or I'm going to not buy the car. But it's not I'm going to buy the car but a lower model. I'm going to buy a different color of the car. I'm going to buy Honda instead of Toyota. I'm going to negotiate for the price. All of those go away and we're just like we're going to do it or not do it. So we don't see the the subtleties of it. And you can see this happen in meeting culture all the time. somebody gets scared and all of a sudden there's a debate black and white thinking instead of actually brainstorming of a new way to do it. The other thing that it does is it creates a false end like oh my business is going to collapse or my marriage is going to end or something that you don't see like what's right next to it. So even in the uh Tibetan book of living and dying it, you don't imagine just your death. You keep on imagining through your death. And so that's a really important thing is it's not just visualizing the worst case scenario. It's visualizing what happens afterwards and then I'm homeless and then wow, I can still get a job. I still have all these skills. Okay, I'm not so scared anymore. And that's with everything. That's that's every one of our fear is you can go down and you can just drive it. you you can just feel it all the way down into the emotion that's being avoided in it. And so with the like CEOs that you coach, um do they also have these sorts of things like I don't I don't want to disappoint my mother. I don't want my wife to yell at me. All humans. All humans, CEOs or otherwise. Yes. Everybody has this. Yeah. And some compartmentalize it and so that they've learned how to just cut that part of themselves off. And if they do that, they're far more likely to be very discontent in their success. And then some of them go and explore it and get clarity and then they don't have to compartmentalize anymore. Like the cool thing about business is that failure or success, it teaches you more about yourself than almost anything except for maybe marriage and child rearing. And so you get to learn so much about yourself if you take business in that way. Now you don't have to be successful to do that. meaning that like or you don't have to do that to be successful. There's a lot of people who are successful who don't do that. But if you want to be content and actually happy with your success and not be the burn burnt out, unhappy 50-year-old with a Ferrari, then it's really a necess necessary part of the process. And so in some habit number two is about embracing negative emotions. And the final strategy for this, which I think is very useful, is something that Joe talks about, which is the idea of staying in wonder. So the way I define wonder is curiosity without looking for an answer. So it's the way that you would look at a sunset or the way a little kid would look at an antill. It's just there's some awe in it. And you don't need to have an answer. You're just there. And you know that you're going to learn something, but you're just there in this awe. And if you can do that either with your emotional state or with a person that you're close with, everything changes. Because most of the time, if we're in a conflict with somebody or with ourselves, it's because we think we know something about them or ourselves. I know that I can't quit eating too much. I know that I can't quit smoking. I know that I keep on starting something, but I always procrastinate. And and so I and so that what we say is, "Okay, stop procrastinating." And then it doesn't work. instead of huh I wonder what makes me procrastinate. What's really going on there? What would what would make it so fun that to do this work I couldn't I wouldn't want to procrastinate. What's the emotion I'm avoiding by procrastinating? All those questions aren't get asked if you think you know what the hell's going on. But even though negative emotions might be helpful to understand when they're holding us back, they're probably not the mode that we want to be in all the time if we want to experience true success. And that is where habit number three comes in. All right. All right. So, at this point, Joe likes to use the analogy of a car and the difference between speed and efficiency. So, a car that is very fast is a car that moves from A to B very quickly. But a car that is very efficient uses as little fuel as possible getting from A to B. Now, Joe's insight here is firstly that top performers are generally seeking efficiency rather than speed. So, being fuel efficient while working towards your goal means that you are using less energy doing the thing compared to someone else for example. And because you are using less energy, i.e. you're more energy efficient at getting to your goal. You're able to sustain that progress for much longer and much more consistently by doing it efficiently, i.e. without wasting energy. And so how do we get to efficiency? Well, this is where Hudson's first law comes in, which is that enjoyment equals efficiency. So typically the way people think about efficiency is that they say, "Okay, I know an efficient car is one that doesn't use a lot of gas and a fast car is one that goes from 0 to 60 really quickly or goes 100 miles really quickly." But somehow or another when we think about productivity, we think that efficiency is how quickly we did it, not the amount of fuel that we used to do it. So most people think about efficiency as like I I got all that all those emails done in an hour. That's efficient. instead of, "Oh, I enjoyed the hell out of that email process." So, the thing is, if you enjoy your process, then you're going to do it. You're going to do it more. It's going to be easier to do, and you get energy from it. So, I would much rather think about, oh, I made a YouTube video and I really enjoyed it because I know I'm going to make another one, and I know that the next one I make is going to be better and it's I'm going to do it quicker because I enjoyed the process. But mostly I'm going to have a crap ton of energy at the end of it. So I'm going to want to do the next one. And so enjoyment is a great measure of efficiency, not how quickly you did it. And typically what happens is if you do your emails, like it's a great experiment to do. Do do your emails one day or your any kind of communication. Sit down for an hour. Do that email and just do it for the dopamine hit. Bam. Bam. I got it. I got it. Done. Done. Done. Done. Done. And then do it the next day with how do I enjoy the heck out of this? And then at the end of those two sessions, ask yourself which one of those was was more productive. And typically what you'll see is that you went to press enter when you were just getting it done just to respond. When you're enjoying it, you're thinking, "Oh, how do I make the most out of this email? How do I how do I take this question and move it two steps forwards instead of one step forward? How do I empower that person? Anything like that. All those things come into play when you're actually in enjoyment that you don't think about when you're just getting the dopamine hit of quick. So the habit here, the reframe is habit number three, the enjoyment compass. The recognition that enjoyment is efficiency. This is something I have been talking about for a couple years now. This is the whole thesis of my book, Feelgood Productivity. You can check it out on Kindle, hardback, paperback, Audible. It's been translated into 35 languages. And if you've read the book, I would love it if you can leave a review on Amazon and or Good Readads. Thanks. But this is a theory that's been very scientifically validated. There's a whole shtick around the broaden and build theory that was discovered by Barbara Frederickson back in like the early 2000s. And I've got loads of information of it back in my book if you want to check it out. And so when I discovered Joe's stuff, which was after I wrote the book, I was like, "Ooh, yay. This is actually a really strong validation for the stuff in the book." Because Joe literally teaches these concepts to these billionaire CEOs at these like companies that whose products you probably use every day. Al also the other side benefit is that most people want to hang out with other people who are enjoying themselves rather than people who are not. So your ability to attract talent, your ability to attract customers, everything like that is much much better if you if there's like oh that person's enjoying life. I want to be around that person. Okay. So enjoyment equals efficiency. And the habit of highly successful people is that they use enjoyment as a compass. Now as I said I've been peddling this idea for a long time but there is always push back that people have about this idea. When I was asked on Chris Williamson's podcast, I mentioned this whole like feel good productivity stuff. And there were a bunch of comments being like, "Fuck this guy. It's all bullshit." Like, you're telling me, "Tell the taxi driver to just enjoy themselves. Tell the dishwasher to just enjoy themselves. you." Uh, what what's your take on that? I love that. You kidding me? Uh, yeah. So, apparently a taxi driver can't enjoy themselves. Like, how? Like, prove it. That's the first thing I would say is like prove that this can be done. If Titchnot Han can teach somebody how to enjoy washing the dishes, something that I hated until I learned how to enjoy it, you absolutely can learn how to enjoy driving a taxi cab. So the the quest that the reason that people get confused by it is because they think that enjoyment comes from what you do, not how you do it. And so I will give you an example of it right now. Right now you and I can sit here and we can enjoy ourselves 5% more. So can the entire audience. Most people would have taken a deep breath, felt their body a little bit, right? It's just like boom. So easy. So if I can enjoy myself 5% more at any given time just by thinking, how do I do it? So like what would stop you from enjoying yourself driving a cab? What would enjoy stop you from enjoying yourself doing anything? How how did you teach yourself to enjoy washing the dishes? Yeah, I I I read titch not Han and I thought to myself he was talking about doing the dishes and he's like it's warm water it's soapy it's really quite lovely if you think about it and I was like yeah whatever zen guy I like they're dishes I hate doing the dishes and uh but at some point I tried to prove him wrong you know and that's the way I did almost everything when I was learning and it's something that I highly recommend other people do which is don't take my word for it go figure it out go figure out how to like sit down and do something that you say you don't like doing and and really ask how do I enjoy it? And if you can enjoy it 5% more, then you can probably enjoy it 10% more. Just like if I can grow my business 5%, I can probably grow my business 10%. And so that's what I did. I just tried to prove him wrong and I couldn't. And there was actually this great I had this really great epiphany. This was a great moment where I told myself, I am going to do nothing except for exactly what I want, what I enjoy doing for a week. I'm only going to do what I enjoy, what I really want for a week. And at some point, the trash really smelt bad. And I did not want to take out the trash, but I also didn't want to smell the trash. So, I sat there. I'm like, well, I committed that I would only do what I want to do. So, and I only do what I'm going to enjoy doing. So I I literally sat it was just ridiculous. I was sitting in front of the trash can for quite a while until I realized, okay, there is a way that I can enjoy taking out the trash and I did I got fully present in my body and I you know I was like oh like how do I lift this thing in a way that feels good in my muscles? Can I actually do a little bit of a workout on the way? I had all sorts of things and and so I enjoyed and that was the moment that I realized oh right enjoyment isn't about what you do only. It's also about how you do it. So I would say if you think there's something you can't enjoy doing, the only way you could prove it to me is that nobody else on the planet enjoys doing it. Right? So if you can sit still for 9 hours a day and enjoy that, which is what meditation people do, you can't tell me you can't enjoy driving a car. Oo, absolutely love this. With a bit of creativity, there is always a way to enjoy something 5% more or 10% more. And a question I like to ask myself that you guys might be familiar with if you're fans of the channel is something I have as my phone wallpaper, which is this little thing of like, what would this look like if it were fun? Whenever you want, you can just ask yourself or whatever you're doing, what would the most enjoyable version of this look like? But Joe actually takes this a step further and he uses this with the teams and the CEOs that he coaches. The cool thing is that the the places that you're not enjoying are exactly the places where you can improve efficiency. So for instance, I'm right now working in one of the Alphabet companies and we're making it so that you every person in the company has to say how much they enjoy a meeting at the end of the meeting. It's like a zero to five star thing and if you don't hit five stars, you have to say what it is they could do to improve the meeting. And what this is doing is it shows every place where people aren't happy, where the inefficiency are. Just by tracking enjoyment, you can say, "Oh, this is what's not working in the company." It's a great diagnostic tool. This is what is working in the company. It's also a great predictor of what's going to fail in the next quarter. Oh, man. A whole sales team isn't enjoying themselves. Probably not going to make their quarterly. So, that's a good predictor. So, there's so much that it can tell you and and and it's such a diagnostic tool. So if you're looking for what's wrong in a company, just look around to see what people don't enjoy and you focus there and work and it'll and it'll prove everything. To what extent can this be applied to like our own solo work as well? I'm kind of thinking that like if at the end or during a work session I would to be like hm how would I rate my enjoyment of the work session and then that might lead to interesting insights and action points potentially. I would say I think the important part would be how do I enjoy it and if it's not five stars then what do I do what what's the what's the iteration I can do next time to to to learn how to enjoy it more so I think the important part is that second step analysis of oh well what I could do next time is take a break every five every 15 minutes I can take a break and do 10 jumping jacks or what I could do next time is to do it with a friend or what I could do next time is be out in a cafe but always looking for one little uh experiment that you can do to improve it. When I talk about the enjoyment thing, people have the immediate like uh response to it at the thought that like if I if I were to do this task in a way that was enjoyable, I either wouldn't do the task at all or I would do it in a way that's not professional or not right or not correct or not good enough kind of thing. Well, hopefully the second is true. Um, meaning that right not not professional is probably a great thing to explore. Uh, most innovation is done because it's not done the way other people did it. It's not done in the way that you're supposed to do it. So, if you're going to innovate, you have to do something that's not professional or right. If you're going to do something halfass, then I don't think you'd enjoy it. And and and if you really enjoy doing things that are halfass, like I've never seen anybody wake up and go, you know what I would really love to do today? A whole bunch of halfassed. That would be great. I'd feel great at the end of that day. So I don't I don't buy that. If that is the case, then you really shouldn't be an entrepreneur and you really shouldn't like work for somebody because that's just stealing. So So So I would say I Yeah, I don't really buy into that that the thing as far as I might not do it. Great. find a way to not do it and still be successful. And there's lots of things that I do that are like that. Oh, I can enjoy doing that. I don't want to do it. Great. I'm going to find another way to do it. As a matter of fact, I think a great time management skill is to look at your entire list of things to do and say, "What are the two or three things that I could do that make all of this easier or irrelevant?" I think that's a like a fantastic move to make. So, if you if you can find a way around it, great. And if you can't then enjoy it. Okay. So using enjoyment as our compass helps fuel our engine of movement of progress of success without that fuel being dirty. It's very sustainable fuel. But now we come on to habit number four which is what the hell happens to all of those things that we have to do or that we feel like we should do even if we don't particularly enjoy them. And so habit number four addresses the internal battle that we are all fighting every single day. Most of us try to motivate ourselves through sheer force of willpower or obligation or guilt or this constant internal monologue of I should do this, I should be more disciplined, I should do that. But what Joe teaches is that actually the top 0.1% of performers recognize that this approach of shoulding yourself creates a huge amount of internal friction and it often backfires. And so this is the anti-discipline method. I think the thing that everybody forgets is that if you force yourself, if you force anything, counterforce happens. So if I say to you, um, man, I told you, look at me. Look at me. Right? What you, people do exactly what you do, which is like, I don't want to look at you. Like there's a resistance that happens. And even if I do look at you, I'm like, but it's not like I'm looking at you. It's like, fine, I'll look at you. So when we try to force someone to do something, whether they're a 2-year-old or whether they're a different from somebody from a different political party, there is a resistance to it. So if you're trying to force yourself to do something, there is a natural resistance to it. There just is there's going to be a natural resistance and that's all friction and that's all inefficiency. So I I don't know if her methodology about I choose easy world and then it all happens. Um it would work consistently for people. But what I do know is that if you recognize that forcing yourself to do something comes with external friction. It comes with the cost. It comes with the toll. It's dirty fuel. It's not clean fuel. Then you start you can start looking at what do I want to do? How do I want to do it? And that's far more efficient. Okay. So what Joe is saying is that forcing yourself to do something that you fundamentally don't want to do. Yes, you can get it done and we've all had that experience, but it's really really inefficient in terms of the amount of energy that's wasted. And the metaphor that he uses is that it's like working with dirty fuel. Now, I really like that metaphor. And another one I like to use with my students in my life OS course is that it's sort of like you're a boat and kind of the action you're doing is like the rowing or the engine of the boat, but the amount you're enjoying your work is like the sail of the boat. So, if you're enjoying what you're doing, you're going with the wind. Your sails are pointed in the right direction and like it becomes easier and you have to use less energy to manually row the boat. But if you're not enjoying your work, it's like your sails are literally against the wind and the wind is like buffeting you. And so, you can still get there. You just have to row really, really, really hard because you are rowing against the wind because you're not enjoying what you're doing. Isn't this what the whole like discipline thing is about? like to what presumably when when people think of like you know top 0.1% CEOs or whatever they generally imagine someone who's very disciplined who like just you know gets the thing done even when they don't feel like it. Yeah. Most of this most of the CEOs especially venture capitalists that I know they are they're not highly disciplined people. They are aligned. They are invigorated. They love to do what they do and they do it a lot. Most of them some of them don't. Uh but they all have things that they don't want to do that they don't do. They all have things that they delegate cuz they don't like. They all have some version of themselves where they are telling themselves I, you know, I should be doing this thing that I'm not doing. All all of them. So yeah, if you are a billionaire CEO of a Silicon Valley company, then you can probably delegate a lot of the things you really don't want to do. But I imagine most of us watching this video are not in that position to be able to delegate absolutely everything. And so the way I think of this is that if there is something you have to do but you don't want to do it, firstly ask yourself, does the thing actually need to get done? What would happen if I just didn't do it? And for lots of things, you realize, oh, you actually don't need to do the thing. Someone else wants you to do the thing, and there's not actually that many bad consequences if you just didn't do the thing. And then if it turns out that you do in fact actually have to do the thing, the next step is to recognize that I don't actually have to do anything, but I'm going to choose to do the thing because I don't want to face the consequences of not doing it. For example, I don't actually have to pay my taxes. No one is physically forcing me, coercing me, compelling me to pay my taxes right now, but I am choosing to pay my taxes because I would rather not face the consequences of going to jail. You might think of this as just a simple semantic shift, but it's a simple semantic shift that reasserts your own autonomy and your own choice. It is not that someone is physically forcing you to do the thing. Most likely you have valition, you have autonomy, and you're simply choosing to do it because you don't want to face the consequences. And then it's a case of asking the question of like, okay, given that I have chosen to do the thing, like file my taxes, I wonder what I can do to make the process 10% more enjoyable. But then we have this whole category where we're telling ourselves that we should do the thing. What's your take on this word should? Ah, yeah. Should. Should is a motivation killer more than anything else. So, there's a a really cool experiment you can do. Just pick anything like brush your teeth. And if you say to yourself out loud, you should brush your teeth. You should brush your teeth. You should brush your teeth. You should brush your teeth. And you just say that for like a minute and then feel how you feel in your body. And then say, I really want to brush my teeth. I really want to brush my teeth. I really want to brush my teeth. I really want to brush my teeth. And you feel how that feels. One, you'll probably go brush your teeth eventually because you because you feel how good it it is to want it. But two, what you learn is that like all your energy is sucked out of you by a should. And all of your energy is given to you by a want. And so using the self-t talk of should is an incredibly like uh it's demeaning. It's like, think about it this way. If if you had a boss and you were working and your boss was just sitting over your shoulder and they're like, "You should do this. You should do this. You should do this. You should do this." Either you'd punch the boss or you'd rebel against the boss or you quit. Like, it's one of those things that's going to happen. But yet, that's how we're our own bosses. It's just not effective. Okay. Objection. Uh, your honor, if I don't should if I don't should myself into doing the thing, I just wouldn't do anything. I would just like watch Netflix and play PlayStation 5 all day. Like what's up with that? Right. So, how did you learn how to walk? You didn't sh yourself then. How did you learn how to talk? You didn't sh yourself then. How does a tree grow? They don't sh themselves. Evolution is a natural thing. It's just what we do naturally. The reason that you would hang out on the couch is cuz you're burnt out by beating the out of yourself for a decade. You'll eventually get up off of it. And there's actually these really great studies that have been done. They call it unschooling where they take kids and they're like, "Hey kid, you're burnt out in school. We're going to take you. You can't you can't like play video games. You can't, you know, get a dopamine fix someplace else, but we're just you just basically don't have to come back to school until you're ready to learn." And those kids usually do nothing for about 6 months and then they kick into gear and then they learn quicker than anybody else. As a matter of fact, there's a guy who goes around who's a math teacher. He won't teach any of these kids until they're like, I'm interested in math. And then he'll teach them and he'll and he can teach them like calculus far quicker than if they did it at school because the kid actually really wants to learn it at that moment. Like imagine how how quickly it would take you to learn to do what you did in if you didn't want to learn it. Like if you're like, I don't want to do YouTube. I don't want to make videos. I don't want to buy cameras. Yeah. You know, so so but as soon as you're like, "Oh, I really want to do that." You learn so quickly. Yeah. Like for me with this YouTube channel, there was no should in the early days. The should started to come in a few years down the line. And it definitely took away some of the enjoyment that I got from making videos. And this is a habit that I'm still trying to master. It's a lesson I keep on having to relearn and relearn. And one kind of trivial area where it's showing up in my life, which I kind of ran Joe through as an example, is that I feel like I should be posting on LinkedIn. Yeah, I find that yeah, just in in this world of like creators and things, I I I I hear the should quite a lot like, oh, I I I really should be posting on LinkedIn. And I sometimes I do I do that to myself as well. I'm like, oh man, LinkedIn's popping off, like diversification, or I really should be posting on LinkedIn. And then what's really unfortunate is that when I when I then say to a team member, hey, hey, we we really should be posting on LinkedIn, so let's figure something out. And then they go in, they figure something out and they come back to me with a strategy and I'm just like, "Oh, I'm not feeling it." And I think it's it's because it stemmed from the original should of like I should be posting on LinkedIn rather than I want to be posting on LinkedIn. Yeah. Or what would make me love posting on LinkedIn? Oh, that's a good question. What would be so exciting that I would that I would like spend time out of my day to do this and I'd feel great about it? That's that's a question cuz that's what got you motivated in the first place. Yeah. And this the other thing that happens is there's a mental loop where it's like, oh, I I I have this idea, this impulse to do something, but I'm going to take all the joy out of it by making it a should. So, oh, I want like every if you look underneath every should, I should work out. If you look really really closely, what happens is I want to work out. There's an impulse to work out and then I put a on top of it. There's an impulse to to to move into business. There's an impulse in you to move into a more more mature audience in business. That's the impulse. And then as soon as like do you want to do that? Yes or no? And and then the rest of it is how do I do that in a way that I enjoy it? But beneath every should there's an impulse. I should work out. There's an impulse to be healthy. Do you want to be healthy? Yes. How do you want to do that? There's lots of ways. You don't have to work out. You can dance. You don't have to dance. You can take walks with people. You don't have to take walks with people. You can have a kid and throw them and try to keep up. Or you can do jiu-jitsu. Or you can you could literally write a list of here's 50 different things I could do that would keep me healthy and I'm going to do each one of them for 3 days and see which one I enjoy most and do those rather than I should post on LinkedIn, right? I should go to the gym. Yeah, I want to I want to experiment my business. LinkedIn is one experiment. What are the 20 other experiments that I can run? Let's Which one do I enjoy most? And then I'm going to run with that. All right. So, habit number four is to eliminate the shoulds. really really easy one to say, a very very difficult one to master, but it speaks to this idea in the field of psychology like this concept of reactance, which is kind of our natural tendency to resist being controlled or being told what to do. And it's not just that we don't like other people telling us what to do. We also rebel against the internal voice in our head telling us that we should do something. The other thing here is that there is a theory in psychology called self-determination theory. And that highlights our fundamental human need for autonomy. And anytime you tell yourself that you should do something, it undermines your sense of autonomy and it completely kills your motivation behind the thing, even if that motivation was initially intrinsic. But surely this can't apply in all situations. I'm not going to let Joe get away with this one so easily. On that note, another objection like to your Joe, is please. Um, where does the concept of duty and obligation fit into this narrative, this sort of western liberal worldview that like you shouldn't shoot yourself into doing stuff? like you know sometimes I might not feel like I want to go to that like family member's house for the that thing but you know society is held together communities are held together by sometimes people acting not in their own self-interests but actually in duty and obligation to a more a wider thing and so like if I just didn't feel like going and then didn't do the thing eventually I'd have no friends and and end up alone um dot dot dot yeah So, I think that that's a great question. The So, first of all, let's let's break it down. Let's say my mom calls me and says, "Hey, I want you to come over for dinner." And I don't want to come over for dinner. And that's I'm like, I feel obligated. I feel like the only reason I'm going to do it is because I have to. I have some sort of obligation. So, first of all, I should be asking myself, what the hell makes it that I only want to see my mom if I feel obligated? Like, I have that I don't want to see my mom so much that I I can't actually get in touch with my desire for it. and I can only be in this obligation. And then if I really have an obligation to my mom, isn't the better thing to do to to solve that problem with her than to come to dinner? Isn't the better thing to do to say, "Hey, how do we have a relationship where we really want to be together?" Because otherwise, you're not really with her anyways. You're just some aspect of yourself is being with her. So, if you're going to tell me about obligation, then I would say break down what you're actually obligated to do. Is your obligation to show up to your mom for Christmas or is your obligation to have a great relationship with your mom? And then and then in that same thing, what is it that you actually want? And what I notice is I want to have a great relationship with my mom is usually much closer to the want than I want to have dinner with her. And so what you'll notice is if you if you take that obligation and you find out what your actual wants are behind it, that's actually probably the closer thing to what you're really obligated to be doing. And then is it an obligation or is it a want? We all want to have great relationships. All of us want that. All of us want to have love in our lives. All of us want to feel safe. All of us want a good community. But the obligation means that you are abandoning some part of yourself to do it and you're not actually addressing the real problem. When I was at this um retreat with Joe and he mentioned that this should thing, I was like, "Come on, Joe. Like you're telling me you never need to experience a should? what what about your kids? Like, you know, don't you feel any kind of duty or obligation towards like feeding your kids? And I thought in that moment, I was like, aha, there's no way he's gonna get out of that one. But then what Joe basically said to me is that, yeah, you're right. I don't feel an obligation to feed my kids. I don't feel like I should feed my kids. I just want to feed my kids because I love them. I don't need to feed them out of obligation or out of duty. And what he kind of said, paraphrasing, was that duty and love are very different things. and he feels like duty and love cannot coexist. Now depending on the culture in which you have been brought up or raised in or what your parents told you when you were younger, you might be thinking of duty and love as being inseparable from one another. In fact, you might be thinking that actually if you really love someone, you would feel a duty to look after them or visit them or do stuff for them or whatever the thing might be. This is something I haven't quite yet figured out for myself. I want to talk to Joe more about it. But definitely the idea like with friends and family and with my wife and my future kids, I don't want to feel obligated to do stuff. I would like to want to do the thing. I used to always feel obligated to do everything. And the what I mean that's the that's the real deal is I would feel obligated to do most of what I did was out of guilt or a sense of obligation and there was no joy in it. There was no love in it. And when I stopped acting out of it, what I found out is that I became a much better person. I I actually I'm openhearted. I love people. I gave them the connection that they actually wanted from me. So that's the other thing is just if you think about it this way, somebody comes into your party and you're like, "Hey, come on in." And they're like, "Well, you know, I'm only here cuz I'm obligated." The only reason I'm at your party cuz I felt a sense of obligation. Like what happens? You're like, "Fuck off. Leave. You don't need to be here. I don't want you at the party for that reason." And and if and if my kid said to me something like, "Oh, if I said to my kid, the only reason I'm feeding you is because I feel obligated to." What is that? It's just a trick we pay play on ourselves to not allow for pleasure. It's really obligation in it in its essence is just pleasure anxiety. It's saying like, "Oh, I can't actually I to enjoy life this much makes me anxious." So, I I'm going to put some some blocker on it and call it obligation. Now, one area in which the should comes up a lot for me and my wife Izzy is that we always feel like we should be working right now. And and so even if it's like the weekend, there's part of me that's like hm maybe I should be working. Why do we feel guilty when we are not being productive? Usually cuz it's a something that we learned from our parents or our caregivers or our teachers or something. We were just taught early on that our they were happy with us when we were valuable when we were productive and therefore that's the thing. Typically you have a typically the background is that there's an overly critical parent who's constantly not nothing is quite good enough and then that critical parents voice becomes part of our own voice in our head and then nothing that we do is ever good enough and there's always something more to be done and my value is in doing more stuff so that one day hopefully mom/voice in my head shuts the up and says you're a good kid and it's fine to be just you. Nice shortcut. Shortcut. It's fine to be just you. Yeah. Um, do you see this in the CEOs you coach at all or the teams where I sort of just need to compensate? Yeah. It's all the time. Yeah. I was just I literally was with a I was with one of the people who work for me and there was like these six things that we have to do and and she was like, "Well, there's these six things we have to do." I'm like, first of all, we don't have to do Like, like, these are six things. We could do a different six things. As a matter of fact, we do not even know if these six things that we're supposed to do are going to be the most effective way of us spending time together. So, let's just give that whole thing up. And then, let's say if we were to do these in the most fun, enjoyable way possible, and we ended up doing something that she thought was going to take 3 hours, we I mean, sorry, 3 days, we did in like 3 hours. And she was dumbfounded like, how on earth? And what had happened was she had made it an obligation. She had made it into something that she had to do. And in doing that, it just became a bigger, harder, more intractable problem. And so I see CEOs make this mistake all the time. All the time. They instead of saying, "Oh, there's six ways to skin this cat, so to speak. There's six different ways that we can make this phone. What's the way that's gonna feel great is usually gonna make a better phone than what's the way that we have to make the phone. All right, so this is a lesson that I keep on having to relearn as well. Again, one of these habits that even though I've written a book about it, I haven't yet mastered that if I optimize for enjoyment as the compass, then actually the things I'm trying to do, they often turn out better and higher quality than if I was trying to make them actually good. Let's say someone has a particular outcome they want. like I want to be, I don't know, financially free or something like that, but then the process to getting there requires them to like, you know, grind after work and grind on the weekends and work on the business and stuff and then there's all this resistance to doing this thing cuz they don't want to do the thing, but they they don't want to do those actions, but they want the outcome of the thing. Yeah. Yeah. Two different issues there. So the first issue is you know what's the need behind the want? So you can do a really simple exercise where what I want is um to be financially independent. What what what's the need behind that want? Oh to feel safe. And what's the need behind that want? Oh so that I don't have to be anxious. Okay. What's the need behind that want? Oh I I want to actually have a joyful life. So the financial freedom is just strategy to get to the thing that they actually want. So that would be the first thing to really like recognize. And the second thing to recognize is you're in a knowing, not a state of you're in a state of knowing, not a state of wonder, because you think that the only way to get you there is to grind. And the only and that means two things. One, the only way to get you there is to do something you don't want to do. And the second thing is you have to do a lot of what you don't want to do. But look around the world and you'll find a lot of people got to financial freedom doing stuff that they wanted to do and not doing a lot of stuff that they don't want to do. I I am a example of that. You are an example of that. So we did stuff that we wanted to do. You were supposed to be a doctor. You wanted to be a YouTuber. Look what happened. You're more successful than you could have been as a doctor. So So there's lots of examples where oh that's actually that my thinking is constricted. my my thinking is stagnant. And if my thinking is stagnant, then then that's a really good pointer that shame is operating again. What's the need behind the want? That is nice. All right. So, the fifth and final habit ties everything together. Most of us operate in a state of time poverty which is where we are constantly feeling rushed and we are reacting to urgent demands and we are struggling to keep and we are struggling to keep up and there's this general sensation that we are working against the clock that time is always running out. But according to Joe the top 0.1% of people cultivate a sort of relationship with time where time becomes their ally. Yeah. So the the last thing that I see, and this doesn't happen with all great entrepreneurs, but the ones who do this are incredibly effective. And most people are running around going, I don't have enough time. They have time mentality. I'm sorry. They have time poverty mentality. I don't have enough time. I got to hurry. I got to rush. I got to do everything and I got to do it all right now. And so there's this huge amount of stress and then eventually there's a bunch of burnout that happens. What I've seen people who are su entrepreneurs who are successful over the long run is they have a very different mentality where they're not working for time anymore but time is working for them. And so what does that mean? It means that little things like oh I'm going to plant today I'm going to spend time planting the seeds that will bloom in next month next year. They have like there was a famous head of Sony back in the 90s who said, "I don't care how we how we did in this year's quarter. What I care about is how we're going to do five years from now." And so he was constantly focused on my time is for the 5 years from now moment, not for the this quarter moment. There's another way that I think I mentioned, which is looking at your to-do list and saying, "Oh, what's the one, two, or three things I can do that will make everything on this to-do list go away or far easier to do?" So getting to-dos done is a dopamine hit. We're naturally wired to do it. And so there is a a a I don't want to call it a discipline. So we're naturally wired to do it. And so there is a a capacity to see through the dopamine hit and say, "Oh, getting getting things done isn't the same thing as productive." And so if you can say, "Oh, what's the one thing I can do that gets 10 things done? what's the thing I can do today that will solve most of my problems in 6 months and I don't require it doesn't require a lot of effort. One example of this for example is investing in yourself. If you learn how to be a better speaker or if you learn how to uh be in touch with your emotions or if you learn how to communicate better all of those things are going to pay off for the rest of your career. Those are seed planting seeds. Right now when I'm doing some if I'm like building a new product I don't think about building the new product as oh I'm building a new product. I think about it as oh I am marketing at the same time I'm building a product cuz I'm interacting with my customer. And by interacting with my customer they're learning about my product and I'm learning to make a better product. And so I'm doing everything in a way that is considering one year out, two years out, instead of just what's the thing I checked off my box today. So if you can master habit number five, which is to escape time poverty, then all of that energy gets put into stuff that can compound and that leads to you having a way higher impact with a lot less frantic effort. The other thing that I noticed generally is that you're just going to miss a lot of things when you rush. And so if you're working for time, you're constantly rushing. you're constantly going from one thing to another. I was recently in a company where I did five meetings in that day and every single one of them we didn't finish the conversation because boom, we had to go to the next meeting or and so there's it was like why have the meeting if the thing didn't get finished? um as an example and so there's a great phrase that I think is the military I think it's the Marines and says slow is steady steady is fast and there's great research on this done that when people are sleepd deprived and working really quickly they are far less productive than they think they are and they are far less productive than the people who are actually not in a rush and not sleepd deprived and there is a quote from Naval Rabikan that I really like which is that the goal should be to play long-term games with long-term people. Now, if you got to this part in the video, I would love to end with a few personal reflections on what I have taken away from from Joe's teachings. I would say that the best way to get started with them is to listen to his podcast, which is called the art of accomplishment, and just scroll through the podcast, and you'll find it on all the podcast platforms. Now, for me, there's a few other bits that I really, really vibe with in Joe's teachings. One is the view framework, which is a really, really good framework for how to navigate conversations. And I found that since applying that framework to my marriage, um, my relationship has improved drastically and we're having a lot fewer arguments. And then one of the main things that I apply to my work life is this whole idea that if we are struggling to make any kind of decision, it is because there is some sort of emotion that we are not feeling. Cuz if we feel the emotion, it wouldn't be a it wouldn't be a decision we're struggling with. It would be obvious what the next answer is. But when we're struggling with that decision, there's often an underlying emotion and then approaching that with curiosity and wonder to think, huh, I wonder what underlying emotion this is and let me figure out a way to feel the emotion. And then like generally for me, I find it gives me a lot more clarity when I follow that process rather than when I try and journal my way to it by trying to logic myself into typing stuff out and talking to chat GBT and things like that, which would be my default tendency otherwise. So anyway, I hope you got some value from this video. And if you are looking for something else to watch that will also help you along your way to being a top 1% person in success, however you'd like to define that success, then check out this video over here, which is a video I made recently that's done super well actually on how to actually achieve your goals. So, thank you so much for watching. Have a lovely day and I will see you in the next video. Bye-bye.

------------

people who are just like I'm just in it for the money they're never hyper successful and they're never long-term successful they might get the money no doubt but their process of getting to that money is incredibly hard what you're about to hear is an interview that I've just wrapped with the incredible Joe Hudson now Joe is a former venture capitalist turned philanthropist who is now the executive coach to some of silicon Valley's most famous and Rich Executives and CEOs the search for purpose assumes that you weren't born with it and so it chases it away so emotional decision making is it's actually what drives us we're all having emotions all the time there is no waking moment where an emotion isn't happening the question is are we conscious of the emotion so in the conversation we talk about the relationship between success money fulfillment we turn into talking about emotions and how to feel emotions and emotional fluidity we do a little bit of kind of therapy for me around like my fear of reading negative reviews of my book and seeing negative comments and what that says about feelings and emotions and ego and all that fun stuff we talk a little about parenting which is kind of interesting and we end with some thoughts about what are the key differences between people who are successful and happy versus people who are successful and unhappy we only get triggered at the stuff that we actually think is true about ourselves oh yeah being able to take an attack and learn to keep an open heart destroys the ego Joe Hudson welcome to the podcast how are you doing I'm doing well good to see you again likewise thank you so much for coming on yeah of course um for people who might not know who you are how how how do you describe what you do for work that's an incredibly challenging question for when you really get into it but the short answer is that I coach some of the most famous CEOs in Silicon Valley and Executives and across the country yeah nice so what does that mean for for someone who doesn't know what coach means like how would you describe how you how you work with them and what what sort of companies are these what sort of CEOs yeah so the the the way that I do the work is that well I was a venture capitalist for years and so I will work on business things with them but often times the thing that's holding them back from business is holding them back in other parts of their life and so we're going to dig into what that is and solve the underlying problems not just the top level problems of the business got it so typically if I can see somebody who is having a problem in one part of their business you can usually find something in their personal life that corresponds to it something that happened in their childhood that corresponds to it and when you can tie that pattern together and undo it then the business frees up and then they free up and they're more fulfilled happier how how how does that link work because you would assume let's let's say someone like Elon Musk maybe he's got problems in his personal life but his businesses are flourishing so like how how do problems in a CEO's personal life end up manifesting in the business oh I mean there's every dozens of ways and so yeah so you can be absolutely miserable and have a successful uh career for sure uh but what typically happens and there's some you know hyper successful people where this is slightly different but what typically happens is that at some point they wake up at like 40 years old they're like oh I have a billion dollars and I'm [ __ ] miserable and I'm getting divorced and it's very public and I'm getting lots of money taken from me from my wife or or I'm like losing half my fortune and blah blah blah blah blah and the board doesn't like me and now they're trying to find another CEO and all that stuff kind of falls apart for them that's clearly not for all of them but that's a typical thing where they have gotten this success and then they realize they got everything they wanted but they didn't actually get what they needed yeah okay so one of the things that I wanted to talk about in this episode was how do you get worldly success but at the same time while also being emotionally and spiritually and like personally and relationally fulfilled yeah and it sounds like that's the sort of thing you kind of help these like ridiculously Rich massive company CEOs with that's correct or in some cases I help people grow massively successful companies so it's some of them I've worked with when they're smaller and then they've grown into something amazing and sometimes it's I'm working with somebody who's already doing something amazing okay um so so generally I think about it like this in like the 1970s you could either be a businessman or you could be an environmentalist and you couldn't be both and somewhere in the '90s they like Walmart as an example said oh hey we can actually help the environment and still be like a great successful company and Lee Scott who was a CEO of the time said when he did it it was like sweeping thousand bills off the floor and so an example that he gave which I loved was he we asked the employees hey how do we help the environment some kid in a break room said hey I have an idea why don't you take the lights out of the coke machines in the break rooms of Walmart savings to Walmart was $1.5 million a year at the time with electricity prices is probably more like 3 million now so J that's an example of where where that transition happened where you can either be a businessman or an environmentalist to where we you can actually be both and I think the same transition is happening in our society now you can be a successful businessman and not be fulfilled and you know do things that just feel horrible to you but at least you have the success that you think is going to make you happy or you can do both and if you're going to do both what you find out is it actually makes you more successful it's like sweeping thousand bills off the floor oh so it's the exact same thing when you really figure it out so an example of this is if you focus say on your own enjoyment in a company where you say oh how do I sell not just to be effective but so that I can enjoy it and be effective then you're going to be a better salesperson and then if you're just thinking about being effective yeah and so it's an amazing thing where you know I I'm thinking of one in particular right now where it's it's this beautiful thought process he's like I don't know can you be happy and run a company and I was like you thought it was possible to real build like a 10 billion dollar company and you can't like conceive of the fact that you can do it while you're happy which is really more about their upbringing typically than it is about what reality is yeah yeah so I I love this concept of you know the there was a line you threw out at this Retreat a couple couple of days ago which is enjoyment is efficiency yes and I thought that was super interest so so so my book is literally called Feelgood productivity and it's about this exact thing about how actually by focusing on enjoying the process uh and finding ways to to have fun you actually become more productive more creative less stressed and we dove into some of the research around that correct but even as someone who literally has it on my I literally have an iPhone wallpaper that says what would this look like if it were fun I still don't take the idea itself that seriously because in my mind there's always the sense of like well I could do the thing that's fun or I could do the thing that makes money right and that often takes me in like a weird puts me in this weird like fork in the road where I then have to think okay so if I I I I have to be okay with leaving money on the table then in order to enjoy my YouTube channel and yeah I guess I'm okay with a couple million a year in profit but like if I grow the business then it's going to make things less fun for me and I have all this narrative around surely success and like worldly success and money can't actually come from enjoyment even though I've literally like written the book about it and I'm like this it's kind of weird so a couple things to think think about the metaphor I love is that I had a girlfriend in college and she used to play tennis and she would serve and hit you very well and the coach put out the basket that you collect balls in and she said serve and hit it and so she would serve and hit it and she'd hit it four out of five times and then he took the basket away he put a quarter in the middle and he said servant hit it and she didn't hit the quarter once but if you put the basket on top of it she would have hit it five out of five times and so highly successful people none of them are in it to make a billion dollars none of them are in it to make a billion dollars they're in it maybe to prove that they're smarter than everybody to win a game to save the world to better the world to to get to space whatever it is they have some Vision about how they're going to do something that's really that isn't about the money and the money is like the the pigment uh that a painter would use or an instrument that a that a a a guitar player would use it's it is the means to an end and so if you think about that for a second that people who are just like I'm just in it for the money they're never hyper successful and they're never long-term successful they might get the money no doubt but but their process of getting to that money is incredibly hard and so if you just look like Bill Gates it wasn't like I want to be the richest guy in the world it was I wanted to build this I wanted to win blah blah blah so it's a similar deal with enjoyment if you have a goal that's beyond the making of money that is how you actually become hypers successful that is the quarter in the middle of the basket so that when you serve you hit it because typically the way that humans work is when they get to the goal they have this feel they feel good for a moment they don't feel good because they hit their goal they feel good because there's nothing that they have to want for a moment so they can just actually enjoy the moment they're like oh okay and then immediately this this new goal comes in and so getting to goal actually creates a lot of anxiety for people so oh my I got to get to a goal I got to get to a goal there's anxiety that and then it's like and so you can if you ever play like a sport like tennis or anything like that it's like game point all of a sudden there's more pressure and you don't play quite as well you get in your head it's that same thing so if you create the goal Beyond money and it's actually your true goal then the money kind of is part of getting to the actual goal Which is far beyond and you don't have that anxiety of like oh my God the money's going to go away oh my God I got to have the money that pushes money away just like if if I was with you if I was like oh my God you're going to go away oh my God I I don't know what if I have to keep you here like what do I have to say all of a sudden you don't want to be around me that would just [ __ ] suck like so it's the same same thing in our life okay so let's say someone's listening to this and you know we have a lot of let's say people in their uh mid to late 20s who are maybe kind of fairly early on in their career and they realized that they hat they hate their job and therefore they they discover Ali abdal on YouTube or the Deep di podcast and they're like oh there's this path that you can start a business to make money and then you can quit your job one day which was sort of what I did in a somewhat roundabout way with medicine yes and a lot of content on YouTube is focused on the money goal how to make your first 10,000 a month a lot of the videos that we title because we AB test titles and we realize that when you put how to make $10,000 a month as the title people click on it yes whereas if you put how to build a business you enjoy no one's going to click on that like we actually tried that we we like we we tried a video which was all about how to have a business you enjoy and absolutely tanked and we just changed the title to how to make your first 10K and boom suddenly it went viral right right so a lot of people are focused on the goal of making money which is why a lot of people are poor oh tell me more well it's just that like if you really want to be rich go read birkshire Hathaway books and study how the people became very wealthy became wealthy like that's how like a a 10,000 how to make $10,000 in video like in general what that means is I want to want to be rich I don't actually want to be rich I I am I'm identified with the wanting to be rich oh one day I'll be able to make it one day I'll get my dad's love one day I'll be able to feel safe but it's you're actually identified in the in the grasping of it you're not identified in the having of it but if I don't have the thing how can I identify in the having of the thing without yeah so this is a great great example so one of the tricks that I will teach people about getting a like stuff in their life that that is so they're like I don't have stuff I'm poor I need stuff that's what they're thinking they are and then that's what they are whereas if they do gratitude every day for all the crap that they do have like look at everything that I mean wow I can go out and eat I can get a cup of coffee I have like the ability to go to the school or I I have blah blah blah and you start identifying yourself as somebody who has stuff and if you do that on a regular basis like a deep gratitude practice ice where you emotionally feel it everybody I've ever seen who does that with some discipline they start accumulating wealth because they identify as the person with something instead of as the person who doesn't have something yeah yeah one of the things I've often heard from um kind of successful entrepreneurs on this podcast is that if you focus on being of service and providing value to others the money just sort of takes care of itself yes and people who haven't been through that process just will think that that's total yes corre because we still have this Narrative of like I can either do good or I can make money right that's the quarter in the middle of the basket for them being of service is a great quarter it feels really good it allows you to feel like fulfilled for most people it makes them feel fulfilled but some people their quarter is just winning or their quarter is going to space or whatever it is but the money just takes care of itself when you have a focus Beyond making the money okay yeah so how how would you go about identifying what that true goal is yeah so that's a really interesting thing the search for purpose which is something that happens for a lot of people in their 20s particularly like 27 to like 30 there's like this crazy search for purpose that happens um the search for purpose assumes that you weren't born with it yep and so it chases it away it's like being a jealous lover right if I'm a jealous lover one thing I'm like I want you I want you I want you I'm also pushing you away because I'm being a dick right so like this is the movement is the same movement when trying to find a purpose if you're like oh I have to search for a purpose you're actually pushing it away rather than saying oh I'm living my purpose naturally if you just naturally look with the books you read if you just naturally look at the things that turn you on that excite you purpose is kind of someone thinks purpose is like a career often but purpose is how you do stuff as much as what you do I can find purpose in a lot of things anything where I feel like I'm contributing to humans feeling um getting to know themselves understanding themselves becoming more authentic is incredibly fulfilling for me and so I can do that working at the post office or I can do that doing what I do obviously I'm going to be more fulfilled doing what I do because I get to do more of it but you can find your purpose just in any interaction like what's the interaction how are you doing this interaction what's important to you about the interaction that's in your purpose but to go out and search for it it basically has no faith in it and it pushes it away one thing I've heard from a from a lot of people is you know around this idea of hey you know one approach to the purpose thing is like oh let me go out there and find it the other approach is sort of maybe what you're talking about is you know what are the things I find myself naturally drawn to and naturally doing that feel fulfilling yes some sometimes sometimes I'll I'll say this because i' I've heard other people say and I'll say in like a video or a Q&A or something and the response will be something like but what if I'm 25 I've got my job I hate my job and all I do in the evenings is watch Netflix and like I don't I don't feel like I have the thing that all these other people seem to have that draws them towards this purpose I would say oh so when you were 15 years old all you had was parents that you didn't like that you didn't want to have to deal with and all you had was Netflix and you're just recreating that with your job that's what I would say to them I would say that typically when somebody's like oh I hate my job I or I hate Authority or I hate the fact that I'm you know oppressed by this economic blah blah blah typically that is a reflection of the relationship with their parents okay so as an example for me my personal story in this I remember I was a venture capitalist and I wasn't particularly successful at the moment I was young in my career and I was reading this story about a guy who is like a peer of mine who'd become a billionaire off of a single like the The Venture Capital company didn't want to make the investment he made the investment it was one of the most successful things ever to hit Silicon Valley became a billionaire 2 years later boom and I felt like a kick in my stomach just cool and I was like what what is that so I felt it and then I just let my body tell me when the first time I felt that was and I was like oh that's the feeling I had like trying to obtain my dad's love which I wasn't able to do and and I was like oh my relationship with my with money is a lot like my relationship with dad like it's like I just transplanted a relationship because my dad wasn't around anymore I was like boom we're just going to put money onto that thing and so oftentimes money for me it was Dad but oftentimes money is a projection of something that happened in your childhood something that you needed that you had to like there's some people like in like a lot of investment bankers it was like if I perform then I will get love and so it's like if I perform then I will get money and then there's the people like I can't do anything to get the love I can't do anything to get the money some people it's like I'm oppressed by that person's love and so I'm oppressed by the money and so a lot of times money is just the projection that we put on to it it's not actually what we think it is yeah because I guess you know a few a few years ago if i' if I'd have known the the financial position I'd be in now I would be like oh my goodness like you never have to work again you're so rich and stuff but now I'm I'm now I'm thinking well how do we grow our business from 5 million to 10 million yeah and there's part of me that feels the part of me that's like the reason I want to do that is just just for fun because I enjoy the game of Entrepreneurship but there is a part of me that's like oh but I feel like I still don't quite have enough and I kind of still feel like I need a bit more but then I speak to people who have like 250 million in the back and they also feel that thing that they need a bit more what's what's going on there yeah so so my my story was somewhat similar I was like interacting with a couple billionaires at this time and I was driving a car and I I I wasn't interacting them as a coach it was like very early in my life and I was driving a car and I was thinking about all the [ __ ] that I didn't have and how much more I needed and I was like you know the billionaires I know they think the same way huh I'm having the same experience as a billionaire yeah and I was like this moment where I kind of saw through the veil for a minute of like oh there's no way that this satisfies me there's no way that this can satisfy me and when I recognized that that's actually when money started flooding into my world now there's a lot of ways to get money to flood into your world but it flooded into my world in a way that was like incredibly enjoyable and not something like I was striving to get so that one day I could be happy and that's the that I think that's the main thing is that it's a carrot on a stick that never actually fulfills yeah but being fulfilled actually gets you money yeah because people want to be around people who are fulfilled yeah like oh you come you let's say You're A salesperson and you feel fulfilled you like the people around who are you're selling to are like oh I want to be around that person because he feels fulfilled or whatever it is you're doing so it's actually a superpower and it helps you make money instead of the reverse which is one day once I get it I can yeah yeah this is what often doesn't sit right with me about some of the content I see on YouTube around how to make money which is like hey you know it's 2024 AI is a thing so like do an AI whatever or it's 2021 start a social media marketing agency right yeah and I'm always like the the the goal like for for people who like I I see this a lot in people who try starting YouTube channels for the money it's never going to work if you start a YouTube channel for the money but weirdly if you start a YouTube channel to share a passion of yours that can add value to other people's lives the money is more likely to follow and you can't guarantee how much money it is but you know AEL I often give to people is if you make a video every week for 2 years enjoy the process along the way and try and get a little bit better each time I guarantee it'll change your life yes I can't put numbers on it but trust me it's going to change your life and I do not know a single person who has actually done that for two years whose life hasn't been changed right exactly but then it's like because the I guess because it's uncertain and isn't a clear cause and effect like direct relationship especially for people who you know like I grew up in a very sort of academic chasing kind of environment where it's like I should only do a thing if it's good for the CV right and then that approach it's like you can't see directly how focusing on enjoyment or focusing on building a business you love is going to translate to financial success therefore you think it's not possible okay so so let's just and so there's a lot of myth there so I want to dispel like a couple ways to dispel that myth the first one is if you go to a high-end real estate agent and you say who are your clientele they're going to tell you the same thing that the economist is going to tell you it's like 15% of them are doctors lawyers high paid people working for somebody yep CEOs Executives something like that the rest of them are entrepreneurs so CVS it's like right best case scenario you're going to be like a lawyer who's going to make less than you make as a YouTuber so the the entrepreneurs are the wealth creators I mean even The Inheritance it's like that inheritance worldwide is something like 15% or 10% and the rest of it is entrepreneurs and so it does like the whole CV thing it's just a a a like how do I stay safe it's just a freaking question of like can I stay safe can my kid be safe is everybody safe like that's all that really is a question of it's not and especially in the world of a I would call it just the opposite which is like how many lawyers are going to be needed in when AI develops by five or doctors or right so we there it's like stocks and bonds stocks feel like they're scary because they go up and down quickly bonds don't feel scary but then they just crash and you get like a massive recession so I feel like it's that it's just a way of looking at risk but the other piece that I would say is like you can look out any window anywhere and you can see thousands of ways that people made money the window itself the Argon gas inside the window the the the glass making company the fuel that made the glass the electricity that you're seeing out the road sign the every one of those things somebody made money doing and most of them multiple people made money there was a person who installed the roads sign there was the person who made the steel there was the person who painted the roadside there's all those companies so the idea that money is scarce is ridiculous it is all over the place it is it is just the thinking that is constricted it is not like a some shortage of it and so how to make money when somebody says to me here's how you make money doing this specific thing nine times out of 10 they're making money on me by training me to do that specific thing it's not actually and and there may be a way to make money doing that and they might have done it and they might actually want to share but there's also a way for them to be making money doing it yeah but there is a way to make money doing anything in the world and so money is doing Business and Entrepreneurship for me is far more of an art form than it is um than is so if you're playing I we talked about this for a second but if you're playing music then you have to have notes if you're you can do anything you can plant trees as an entrepreneur you can cut them down as an entrepreneur you can take guns off the street as an entrepreneur you can manufacture guns as an entrepreneur anything you want to do you get to do it's an expression of who you are and when you align that when you say oh making money isn't something I have to do to be me making money is an expression of me then things smooth out considerably oh nice nice That's good um so you've got an 18-year-old daughter who's just going off to college very shortly yeah yeah yeah um how are you thinking about the whole balance between you know let's say she wanted to study I don't know history a lot of parents would be like well you can't do anything with a history degree other than be a history teacher and like yeah she wants oh not history but she Liars college so how do you how do you think about this balance between I want my daughter to have a financial safety net assuming you weren't rich and like I want her to follow her passion yeah kind of thing it's a great great question so uh my daughter uh this is a great story and I give it to any entrepreneur I'm going to tell it in a long waye uh the first one is I had a I had a barber and the the the barber was a painter and he was not able to sell his paintings and I said what's the problem goes I don't like getting rejected I said tell you what I'll give you $22,000 if you can get rejected 50 times in 6 months and now I'm the only person who hair he cuts because he sells paintings and it was just switching the idea that rejection was bad to rejection is good so I was sitting with my daughter one day she was a junior in high school she's now a senior just about to graduate and I said hey I noticed that you're really avoiding rejection and she said yeah I am I don't like the feeling I was like great so I'll give you $2,000 if you get 50 rejections she's like rejection of what I'm like I don't know what do you want to do she's like I want to go to Panama this summer or I want to go to some place speaking Spanish this summer and I want to study science I'm like cool like somewhere in the environment so I'm like cool so that's what I'll do you get 50 rejections so she started writing letters she wrote other letters and everything happened and she got this job in Panama on an island she got an apartment not like she made the job and by getting rejected tons of times and she was going to go out for like two months and except for the paper workk didn't come through and she's like I don't know what I'm going to do I'm like how many rejections have you had and she's like oh I've only had you know whatever was 30 I was like well you're not you didn't make the $2,000 and she like thought about it for a minute and so she ended up going to Sacramento sitting on the steps of like the capol building or one of the buildings there though she needed the paperwork and asked every person with a suit if they could help her get the paperwork done she got the rejections and she also got the signature that she needed and she ended up in Panama so what do I think about what college she goes to I don't think it matters at all that's what matters what matters is that she is willing to face that and be in herself while she faces rejection and goes after what she wants that's what's going to be successful it's not going to be a resume and I can how many entrepreneurs who didn't finish college Bill Gates Zuckerberg I mean Matt Mullen Wick there's just tons of them nice that's a great story I love that yeah we're just GNA take a little break from this conversation to talk about brilliant who are very kindly sponsoring this episode brilliant is an interactive platform where you learn by doing they've got thousands of lessons on maths data analysis programming and AI I've been using brilliant for The Last 5 Years and the thing I love most about brilliant is that they really focus on learning by doing in a very interactive sense rather than just consuming the content they've got a first principal's approach to learning that helps you build understanding from the ground up rather than just absorbing information without really knowing how to apply it Brilliance lessons are crafted by an award-winning team of teachers and researchers and professionals from MIT celtech Microsoft Google and a bunch of other fancy places and the courses on brilliant really help you build your critical thinking skills through problem solving not just memorizing things so while you're building real knowledge on specific topics you're also becoming a better thinker now I personally think that learning something new every day is one of the most important fun and energizing things that you can do each day and Brilliant makes daily learning super easy with their curated lessons they've also recently launched some lessons on large language models which is the technology that powers things like chat GPT and so given the rise of AI tools more recently if you understand how they work that can help you get an idea of how to use them to get your best output uh which can be super helpful for whatever industry you happen to work in anyway if that sounds up your street and you would like to try out everything brilliant has to offer then head over to brilliant.org deepdive and that will give you a 30-day free trial and also 20% off the annual premium subscription so thank you brilliant for sponsoring this episode and let's get back to the conversation so coming back down to the this this idea of how to be successful and fulfilled at the same time yeah um one thing that I know you talk about in your podcast and in your videos is emotions yeah now I was hoping we could take a bit of a left turn into emotions because emotions are something that I've I think I I sort of struggle with and I was I was sort of Life coached on your podcast which is also on this podcast Channel Wherever people are watching or listening to this and I still don't really get get the whole like yeah I I don't I don't really get the whole emotions thing and I don't I don't even know what I mean by that but okay what I think I mean by that is that there are some people in my life um who seem to feel a lot of things yes and then there's me and a small number of other people in my life who don't seem to not really feel things and when someone asks me how I'm feeling yes I kind of go a bit blank and I'm like I don't know fine I guess yeah and I did one of these like positive negative affect score thingies and I basically scored zero on propensity to feel prop propensity to feel negative emotions but I also scored fairly low on propensity to feel positive emotions yeah and this was in um the book that opro co-wrote with Arthur Brooks I think and it was sort of they called it the the judge archetype someone who has like low negative effect but also low positive lowish positive effect and so pretty tranquil most of the time Good Vibes yeah what am I missing about like what people are feeling with emotions and is it possible for someone who doesn't feel emotions very strongly to start then feeling emotions yeah so there's a lot of stuff and I want to transition with a story about money and emotions which I which I look um so my wife and I we do these um really intense executive Retreats for like 12 people it is really intense a lot of emotional movement uh we say no to a lot of people because of the intensity of it and when we're doing that we're working from 7:30 in the in the morning till about 10:30 at night 7 days it's exhausting people are crying getting angry all this stuff's happening and we're at the end of it we're tired and my wife and I were talking about how there was this trade that we could have made 10 years back that would have basically amounted for like $70 million and we were like oh What would life have been like we're just kind of contemplating it for a minute and we're like oh that would have been bad like we would have we would have stayed married I'm sure of it because like our dedication there but we might not have started this business like the coaching and the and the trainings and the facilitation and the classes and everything and so um and I asked her I said hey if somebody offered us a billion dollars for this business right now and the only caveat was that we couldn't compete we couldn't do anything in this field anymore would you take it and we both thought about it and then we both went and then we both looked at each other like yeah no we wouldn't we wouldn't do it came home told my youngest daughter about the Story 3 days later she comes over to me she's like I've been thinking about my billion dooll idea I'm like oh cool you want to make a billion dollars she's like no no no I want an idea so good that I wouldn't sell it for a billion dollars oh man that's good that's good I couldn't that's not a head decision that's an emotional decision that feeling of like oh my gosh like my head was like no of course sell it for a billion dollars right the emotion and so the reality is neurologic Ally speaking that if I took the emotional Center out of your brain you would like almost cease to make emotions your IQ would stay the same you could take an IQ test it'd be great but to it would take you a long time to decide what color pen to use it would take you a long time to decide where to have lunch to the point where your life would completely fall apart so we actually don't make logical decisions we use logic to decide what we think the emotional response of this situation will be we we use logic to decide what we think the emotional respons yeah like if we do this are we going to feel happy if we do this are we going to feel sad so think about like how much have you done to feel safe how much have you done to feel loved how much have you done not to feel like a failure how much have you done not to guilt your mom how much right how many right exactly so that's actually how we make decisions and logic is just being used to determine what how we're going to feel so and the way to think about this is like hey I'm going to tell you you're going to be homeless as it turns out you're going to be homeless the good news is you're going to [ __ ] love it it's going to feel so good every day you're going to be like this is the most amazing experience of my entire life I'm so grateful all of a sudden homeless doesn't sound so scary that sounds pretty good so so we're we're we're avoiding the emotional experience we're trying not to have and we're deciding to get to an emotional experience that's how our neurology works it's how our system works and so so emotional decision- making is it's actually what drives us so we're all having emotions all the time there is no waking moment where an emotion isn't happening the question is are we conscious of the emotion or are we not conscious of the emotion in my case I think I'm very not conscious of a lot of these emotions right cuz when you phrased it that way it's like oh yeah of course I started my first business to feel more safe and of course the YouTube channel was an out Outlet of that and of course there's some aspect of it some aspect of feeling loved that I get from uh nice comments and people coming up to me saying you changed my life and it's like all all of these are feelings that I'm I'm like the the feeling is almost the goal right and the thing that I do to get to the feeling happens to be the YouTube channel or the podcast or the whatever thing is exactly so when you think about it that way so if you take a kid and you've been physically abused as as an adult you put a quarter in one hand and a key in another hand they won't be able to tell you which one is which even though you and I would because we haven't been physically beaten so the way it works is that we stop feeling the stuff that hurts too much right that's that's the way the neurology goes and so if it was really hard to feel emotions if emotions weren't safe if you were if love was removed if you were ostracized for emotions we just stopped feeling them and we started to contain them it requires musculature holding it requires different things to happen to the body it's uncomfortable and so there is a natural progress of like how do we start to learn to feel our emotions again and then how do we express those emotions and then how do we get to fluidity with those emot emotions and that process is amazingly useful in life it's like a big part of everything that I do when I'm coaching folks is to have them help them get through that process nice so as an example somebody gets super overwhelmed oh my God I'm overwhelmed because I got so much busy blah blah blah blah blah blah blah it's like that's just a stuck emotion that's a stuck emotion stuck emotion what do you mean by stuck emotion like like it means they have an emotion that is too intense for them so they're compartmentalizing it okay they're saying no I can't feel right now because if I feel that everything's going to go crazy so they try to compact it push it down and then that's the overwhelm and so whether they slow down enough to like be able to integrate it or they express it which is a far quicker way to get there so I've seen people like in this I can't solve the problem I don't know what to do they have like a an expression of anger and then boom Clarity I know what to do now and so logic works like this it goes a plus b equals c and then therefore a minus C equals B and emotions work like this oh oh I got it okay so what are the what's the road map here if like I would like to get to emotional fluidity whatever the hell that means like from my starting point right now like what are what's what's the road map and I guess what are some some of the starting steps yeah that I or someone listening to this who feels in that position where they're like yeah I don't really feel my emotions particularly well like right how do we how do we do that so so emotions are so emotions come in where we have them and we go oh that's uncomfortable or that's comfortable I want it or I don't want it and so you're kind of making these decisions the end of emotional fluidity is I I love having every emotional experience and they move through me with ease but I don't feel controlled by them oh okay yeah nice so that that's basically how it works what typically happens somewhere in the middle is somebody has an experience of someone who's really angry or really sad guilt tripping them are scared all the time and they feel oppressed by that emotional experience and they're like I'm not going to do that I'm going to control the emotion which is kind of the middle of the journey yep so the first part of the journey is okay I have these emotions they're relatively fluid except for they cause me pain in some way and so I start trying to manage repress compartmentalize push down these emotional experiences because that's how I'm going to be happy that's like then at some point you're like oh wait a second this isn't working this is giving me cancer or this is making me depressed because I haven't released my anger or whatever it is and then once you you're there then you're like okay I'm going to start to learn how to feel and express these feelings the feeling the feeling part is is is can be done in a lot of ways meditation can be a way to do it meditation can also be a way to repress emotions so you can use it either way breath work is a great way to start feeling some of the emotions um I did it a horrible way so like so my personal story on this was I was um when I was young my parents thought me crying meant they were bad parents so what they did was they made fun of me when I cried so that I wouldn't cry so they wouldn't have to feel that stuff and so they took pictures of me crying and then they put the photograph in an album and when I was like 24 years old I was flipping through an album that for those younger that we used to take photographs and put them in albums and and I I was like oh oh [ __ ] like that's probably why I haven't cried in so long so I took it out put it on my desk I I'm going to learn how to cry 6 months later three months later whatever it was I hadn't cried I was like oh [ __ ] so I guess I'm going to have to fake it that's what this was my thinking I had no guide on this so I lived in Los Angeles I went up to like 10,000 feet and I took a trail and then I went off Trail so that nobody could hear me crying because it was so shameful and I would fake crying once or twice a week and then one day I just started crying and it was actual tears and I actually cried and I cried for 4 days I could have stopped but I didn't want to CRI for four days four days four days are just and holy crap was my life so much better after crying for four days so like like just the weight just like for anybody who's listening to this here's an experience you can do stop feeling right now take yeah know you don't think you have an emotion but there's some emotion do anything you can to stop feeling right now you have to constrict a muscle you your eyes literally when you go back right that takes [ __ ] energy yeah and if you do that habitually you're constantly in that PL and so to actually feel the emotion releases all that stuff because you don't have to hold back to do it and you get a lot of clarity because it used to be I would do stuff to avoid sadness so I would make a business decision to avoid sadness now I'm like sadness is great I love sadness I cry I feel better this is fantastic why would I ever avoid feeling sad and now I have a business decision oh there's 50% chance sad but it's the right thing to do I'm going to take it yeah before 50% [ __ ] sad it's the right thing to do I'm not going to take it okay nice so this is reminding me of a podcast episode I did with my brother like four years ago um and so my brother and I and like outside of this podcast we have another one that we just chat every now and then yeah and I had discovered that week that there was a forum read on some celebrity gossip Forum about me where people were saying mean things about me oh and so I I'm so sorry that sucks yeah oh well so it was it it was it was interesting cuz I thought hey what a perfect chance for me to practice my stos ISM chops and started reading through this threat yes and in the and and I was so excited by this that in this podcast episode I was like I said to my brother hey tame you know let's let's go through some of these comments and we started reading some of the comments and he was like how do you feel right now and I was like no you know I feel fine and he was like because you literally look like you're about to cry and I was like hm well fine I will grant that I'm feeling a little bit of maybe something but like I didn't want to admit to myself that I was feeling sad or hurt by these comments from these [ __ ] strangers on the internet stuff yeah and we ended up clipping that thing and it it's gotten like 50,000 views this like conversation between me and my brother right and a lot of the comments are like whoa yeah it's it's clear that Ali is really feeling something but is just completely ref using to acknowledge the feeling of these emotions that's right and now and then so fast forward four years later like to two days ago you and I and a couple of other friends were chatting over dinner yeah and this friend Kelly asked oh how are you feeling about the book and I said yeah I don't really know I I I haven't I haven't read any of the reviews because I've heard from authors that you shouldn't read the reviews and both you and Kelly suggested that in a in in a gentle way that reading negative reviews can be a very sort of spiritually enlivening and it's good for the soul yeah kind of thing yeah if it's SED the with the right s towards it for sure and so like if you're looking to disintegrate your ego trolls on the internet are [ __ ] fantastic yeah so it's it's almost like I'm avoiding reading reading reviews because I mean I made the mistake of just before the book came out looking at good reads and the we'd sent out the advanc reader copies yeah and they're more critical than than the standard standard readers and I saw some two and three star reviews and good reads and I was like and then I was like okay I can see why these authors gave me the advice of never to read reviews and then I started avoiding them to the point that now if anyone almost like what brings up the amazon page I almost don't want to see how many stars there are and how many reviews there are cuz I I want to avoid some kind of feeling yeah that's right and it was only like two days ago when you and Kelly both mentioned this I was like oh [ __ ] I think I'm trying to avoid some some kind of feeling right so exactly where where am I in this like levels of emotional fluidity in in this specific context I guess well in that specific context you are you have not learn to enjoy the the emotional experiences that are coming up and and it's this is the hardest part for people to Gro you mean I can enjoy helplessness yes on the back side of helplessness is the feeling of empowerment on the back side of sadness is the feeling of relief on the back side of anger is a feeling of clarity and so and and this has been known for a while like in traditional Chinese medicine they talk about it in in in tibetan texts they talk about how they call them like the five poisons equal the five virtues and how they they basically the way I look at it is this you have a tube and that tube let's call that tube anger okay and you twist it this way and it's I'm not angry and you twisted this way and it's like you son of a b and you twisted this way it's nice dress but untwisted it is Gandhi it is Martin Luther King it is Mother Teresa it is it is a clear bound with love no that's not because we don't get angry at anything unless we care about it there's always care and anger there's always love and anger and there's always a boundary in anger and so when it's unconstricted that's what it ends up being and so but if you're trying to resist it it Kinks and then something else happens avoidance or whatever and so that's how I I see it is is that that that tube all your job is to do is not constrict it and then when you don't constrict it it gets fluid that's the fluidity part of it and then it actually feels different so think about it this way if you went to a party and everybody didn't want you there you would act one way yep and if you went to the party and everybody wanted you there you would act a different way your emotions are the same your emotions show up and you want them they're going to act one way your emotions show up and you don't want them they're going to act another way is this this uh was it on your podcast that I heard this like like Joy is the matriarch or some just like yeah what's what's that idea yeah so Joy is the matriarch of a family of emotions and she won't come into a house unless your children are welcome basically and so what it means is that if you are trying to repress anger you are not make there's no room for Joy so Joy is just kind of the Natural State Joy and love they're the Natural State and as long as you're not containing some emotion there's room for them and they show up and so you see that all the time in our Retreats when people moove their emotions all of a sudden they're just more joyful just like I was after I cried for for 4 days I was like oh goodness gracious and by move their emotion like what do you mean move their emotions I mean like get it out of their muscle so Express their emotions and is really important to express them the right right way is strong but so you can express your emotions in such a way that create shame and then that's not going to be very helpful yeah so expressing your emotions by like yelling at somebody or being sad at somebody or being scared at somebody which means trying to control them with your emotions you're going to create shame it's not actually move your emotion y whereas oh I'm going to get angry and and then I'm actually going to find a place where I'm loved after my anger so it's not like I'm there's a shame thing that's the best possible way so you're moving the anger you're yelling you're doing whatever you have to do but nobody no you're not hurting anybody with your words you might be having them but you're not doing it at somebody that emotional expression is the thing that allows you to start falling in love with the emotional experiences so is it sort of like you know how kids with anger management problems you tell them to get a pillow and punch it in the garden or something like that sort of idea yeah so there's the interesting thing there's been a tremendous amount of research so somebody's going to geek out and go let me go look do the research so there's a tremendous amount of research that shows if you start moving anger you're going to get angry more often and that's absolutely the case just like when I got sad I got sad more often like but what happens is it like a lot of it has been piled up and then moves out and then all of a sudden there's just less anger less passive aggression so when you repress something like anger leads to a lot of depression passive aggression feelings of stuckness so if you're listening to this you're like I feel stuck nope you're just not moving your anger cleanly oh I feel depressed nope you're just not moving your anger cleanly passive aggressive no you're just not drawing your boundaries and and moving your anger so so that so as you start moving them it it just kind of it it for while it gets and then it starts calming down and then all of a sudden then you have this emotional fluidity it's like riding a river it's not like being controlled being thrown over the Rapids where does the idea of chemical imbalances in the brain fit into this model cuz like the thing that you just said well if if you have depression well I I I can almost certainly imagine there are people listening to this repression is chemical imbalance hang on SR work this guy's full of [ __ ] [ __ ] you Joe Hudson on the okay you did a lot of things there uh SS SSR [ __ ] you Joe Hudson that thank you for I like that um ssris they don't actually work 100% of the time like there's plenty of research that shows that that's not the case also yes there are chemical imbalances that this is not all forms of depression I would call this more in the Damia low-level depression realm what I can tell you is I do know a lot of folks who I've worked with who have and I'm not I'm not diagnosing anybody but I there's a lot of people I've worked worked with where they've had depression and they that depression has been relieved but it's not just from anger so the way I look at Consciousness generally is there's the head the heart the gut that's a metaphor um but when you approach healing if you approach it in that way it's usually far more effective so the head is intellect the heart is the emotional and the gut is the nervous system or you could call it roughly roughly for those who are um neuroscientists out there the prefrontal cortex the head is like the human brain the mamelon brain is the heart and the gut is more of like the nervous system Reptilian Brain if you hit them on all three levels you're going to have much more transformation so you want to hit them on all three levels and so depression um I would say the head is the negative selft talk which is actually how it's defined in the DSM um in dyy anyways and it's like constant or increased negative self basically I would call Self abuse so you want to change that the way that you talk in that which can't be done by trying to change it but there's a whole bunch of tricks on how to change that and then there is uh the heart which is the emotion which is a release of anger sometimes sadness but often anger and then the gut part of it is about feeling safe it's because anxiety and depression go hand in hand so you wear out your adrenal glands and and then depression ensues so it's a three-part thing if if I'm working with someone who's depressed that's that's my Approach and it's not 100% effective but it's It's very effective a lot of the time okay so it's like and just by the way on that one you have to go into a lot more detail to figure that one out um but I do have a a podcast on it that like you can actually get into all the details of oh perect we will link that in the show notes or the video description wherever people are watching or listening yeah um so it sounds like in this model there are a bunch of different emotions and these emotions are almost like pipes yes and for certain people the pipes are kinked to the point that they don't identify or or or they don't consciously feel when this emotion is chilling in the pipes yes or they twist the pipe in a way that makes them that convinces themselves that the emotion doesn't exist yes and a lot of the goal of emotional fluidity is to unkink the pipes and then ideally start to enjoy the process of the emotion flowing through the pipes you can't unkink the pipes without enjoying the enjoyment happens first enjoyment is the thing yeah and so so yeah so typically the way I would think of those stages is first you know the identific that the emotions are having then there's the management there's often a management stage sometimes you need to learn how to label them depending on the particular thing and then there's the expression of them and then there's the place where you fall in love with them and that creates fluidity so okay so you in my tangible example of I'm afraid to read read book reviews or see negative comments written about me on the internet right how might I approach becoming more comfortable or loving those Sensations or whatever the very best possible way and this is is going to sound but like we had a good relationship and I was coaching you what I would say is I would have your girlfriend hold you literally physically like hold you and then you read read the the the negative reviews and and and and I wouldn't have her try to make you feel better it's really important so you don't want like someone to be like it's okay it's going to be all right because basically what you're saying is I'm in you're invalidating the emotions you're saying your emotions are making me uncomfortable stop it oh okay so you don't want that but you want just someone who's totally with you in the experience and saying right I love you yep you can be sad I love you you can be upset I love you you can be angry I love you and just actually just someone who's sitting there loving you as you're having the emotional experiences and then your job is to make sure that you're breathing so that you're not constricting the muscles and stopping the emotion and in your particular case like I would watch out for like jaw like holding the jaw or holding the throat tightly which is where a lot of the emotions get held yeah I did a a breath work thing for the first time this morning yeah here just in the in the space behind us and I felt a lot of like vibration in the jaw yeah and also like in the the all no nerve position of the fingers and stuff but like there was a lot in the jaw and also sort of just under the rib cage on one side yeah and I was like huh because I've I've listened to some of your podcasts I was like okay is this the whole the whole like draw tension thing yeah is there any relationship between like breath work and this emotion stuff absolutely yeah like when we do the iners Retreats that are off you know we don't we don't advertise them or anything like that when we do those we do breath work and emotional release work h on the note of okay so I'm going to I'm going to try this thing with my with my girlfriend the whole holding and as as we read negative reviews yeah um and then feel whatever feel but like it's like a kid or as as the person today the coffee shop said like the swan it's like so the emotion starts to arise the mind starts to tell you things like they're not rational yep you're right it's not rational or the mind will tell you if I'm sad I'll be sad forever if I'm angry I'm going to destroy my world if I'm scared I'm going to be incapable and the job is to say like oh I've been listening to you for 30 years or so I'm just going to listen to the emotions for 20 minutes H nice and then allow yourself to just feel the emotional experience that's happening okay so if anyone's listening to this I'm going to go on a bit of a Mad one reading negative Amazon reviews but I would appreciate some positive ones as well so if you haven't yet reviewed the book um on the note of okay so one thing that I really struggled with and continue to struggle with to an extent in my relationship is I want say one thing back up on one thing but also just like don't overblow your nervous system so do it into a point where you're just like don't don't go out of Regulation to do it like I have done that many times you will recover but it's a far quicker process to to like feel it into a point where you're like okay that's enough and then okay then go back to it okay so small doses rather than like a it may be small maybe just depends on your system just don't don't blow yourself out okay nice um one thing that I've struggled with and still do is the idea of like how to emotionally support my partner oh yeah and you mentioned like it's like I I don't really have any good models for this um I didn't I didn't have a dad growing up and like I don't and so it it's often weird for me to to think how would like a 30-year-old dude offer emotional support in like like what does that even look like and in the sort of a thing in my head I was like oh it's going to be okay it's all right like you see those stuff in the movies yeah how do how do I emotionally support my partner so the I the way I did with you and you actually felt it so if you go like back on the tape or the podcast you said oh I got these terrible views and I said I'm so sorry yeah I'm right here with you I'm empathetic yeah I'm not trying to fix you and I'm just right here with you yeah he won't say oh I'm so sorry I'm sure the book is actually good and blah all that kind of stuff just like yeah I'm just just empathetically being with somebody is all that's really required okay not wanting them them to change it's just literally I can sit in loving attention of you and your emotional experience and especially men in America especially men in western civilization man we have got to go in there and fix it but it's really not required and it Al often makes people feel very unseen because what you're telling them is like you're wrong for feeling this it needs to be fixed in of like oh I you and you can feel this no problem Y what if what if say okay what if the spouse is upset because of something that I have done same thing okay so just like said in loving attention yeah just be like oh I really if you want to go big this works but it can be really hard yeah um is oh right I hear that you're really upset with me I want to hear all about it tell me tell me what's bothering you y yeah what how how do you want to handle this what's going on like what do you want from me I'm not I'm not going to sit here and agree to whatever you want from me but I want to hear about it I want to like and what you'll notice is typically when somebody's given that space they'll like explain they'll get actually I think it's just I need this because it's the emotion that's stuck that's actually causing the problems it's not H if people are allowed to have that movement then typic they get to a much more yeah and it's unbel like it's if you can do that in a marriage it's like a like like such a cool superpower cuz I guess the Temptation there is to to defend ourselves correct be like oh but like I didn't mean that come on like right which is basically two people one person feels like they've been attacked yeah this person defends themselves they feel like they're defending themselves but this person feels attacked by the defense and so that's all that's happening is both people in a fight typically in a marriage it's like both people feel like they're defending themselves and both people feel like the other person's attacking them so yeah the dropping of the defense absolutely like okay I'm going to try this this is good I need to remember this the dropping of the defense drop the defense it's it's not unlike reading the bad reviews okay yeah nice yeah like being able to sit with a negative emotion yeah exactly and and and sit with the negative emotion and allow it to the point where it actually becomes quite enjoyable oh okay that's it cleans out like it cleans you out it's an amazing experience okay and what about if um let's say the partner is upset because something at work she she thinks she did something badly yes and I look at the thing and I'm like no it's actually really good yes and I want to offer reassurance that like she the fact that she thinks is bad is actually it's not actually bad it's like actually really good yes and like this there's all this like perfectionism in poster syndrome that she's feeling about the thing yes and I kind of want to reassure her that like no the thing's actually good right I feel like this is counterproductive anyway yes totally totally counterproductive um I it's not counterproductive to say it once to say oh actually my opinion is that it's quite good but to try to chase her into her happiness or to try to push her into her happiness so there's a great story about this there's like it was he was a Quaker man and he suffered like this big depression and um I love this story and he had a great community of people and everybody showed up and they said here's what you should do to not be depressed blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah one person came every Tuesday and just washed his feet and he said that did more for me than anything else because everybody else was agreeing with me that I was broken the person who was washing my feet was the only person who was saying to me you're not broken you're complete just as you are and that was the message that I actually needed and so chasing someone to feel better is more of an expression about you not wanting to feel that way it's more of an expression of oh I don't want to feel that uncertainty I don't want to feel that like uh yeah and so then it is about them and so it's far better to just be like yeah like cool you feel like ah yeah you feel like you didn't do good enough oh that sucks nice yeah and also ener like in a relationship like one person holds one side of the one side of the emotional experience and someone holds the other so like typically I've seen this tons in companies and in relationships one person's really worried about money one person's not worried about money and then all of a sudden one person's like oh I'll start worrying about money and then the other person's like oh come on relax about the money like that we hold these roles so if you want to hold the role of The Optimist everything is good then there's no other place for her to be but in the oh wait is it going to be good enough is it good enough and and being in the doubt yeah and so drop that role and it kind of insists that she can drop the other role this reminds me of a story I don't of a story in like the world of uh in the world of uh customer success or customer support yeah in that if a customer comes to you with a complaint there are two chips in your hand one chip is this is a big [ __ ] deal the other chip is this is not a big deal and the chip that you take the customer has to have the other one right so if you take the chip of this is not a big deal the customer has to take the chip of this is a big [ __ ] deal whereas if you take the if you take oh my goodness I'm so I know this is a huge deal like you must feel absolutely terrible but then the customer has to be like it's you know it's not that bad I calm down kind of exactly that's right that's absolutely right okay so in my quest to help my partner feel less imposter syndrome and perfectionism by reassuring her that her work is good she almost I almost forc her to take the position that no oh my work is actually [ __ ] Yeah Yeah by especially if it's pushing if it's like a one time oh actually I think it's great I remember one time I did this experiment I had a long time ago I had an employee who was like this is [ __ ] and I I was like chasing I'm like no this is good this is what I want from you and it yeah wasn't working and um and then so I kind of B basically took like a completely different position and they're like it's [ __ ] and I was and I was like I was like yeah and then they started to defend themselves and started to say why it was so good yeah I was like yeah see you knew it was good and there yeah it's a good Mind Trick um one of the things you said earlier on is that you uh enjoy or like get a lot of fulfillment out of helping other people Express their authenticity or what to effect um I wouldn't use the word help maybe I did but I would try not to but I would say yeah anyway I'm of service to that great okay why not the word help because again it says that they're not capable of it without me cool yeah or often can mean that to in people's minds the word itself isn't a problem it's just the way people interpret it okay nice on the note of authenticity yeah one thing that I sort of brought up to you slightly earlier this week is that um one issue that I have is and I'm sure a lot of people listening to this have this as well I get a lot of emails about it is you know wanting to be authentic to oneself yes makes a parent upset in some way or another yes yeah how does one deal with this yeah so the there's a a couple ways to look at it one thing that if anybody's really really working on this there's this weird Show on Netflix maybe you can find it and link it in the show notes there's a weird Show on Netflix uh called Magic for humans and there's this I think it's episode three or something like that where he does an episode on guilt and he's got all these moms around the table and all the moms they're just like oh yeah I'm really good at guilt guilt is like the coolest thing like oh I like yeah I can really get him to do what I want when when I do guilt so if you have a mom like that like you should watch that because it makes you see that it's like what oh you know I thought she was really sad but is she like what's going on there uh but generally the thing about guilt is that it it it creates an emotional Edy guilt shame judgment they basically make the emotions kind of run in place so you don't actually get the fluidity so they're an emotion that kind of like that create an an Eddy of the emotional experience so one of the greatest things to do is if you couldn't feel guilt what would you have to feel if I couldn't feel guilt would I have to feel yeah so your mom wants you to be a doctor say again like stay being a doctor stay being a doctor right and she she she's actually like for the record she has uh this used to be a problem in the past she's now chill with me being a YouTuber unless just use that as example cuz I think a lot of people have this where the parent wants them to do career X they actually want to do the liberal arts version career X and parents like oh my God like that's terrible yeah exactly Okay who wants you to be a doctor and if you couldn't feel guilt what would you have to feel so the idea is that we're feeling guilt because of that but if you said that's just not on the table not not on the table so what would I have to feel shame same same okay fine I can't feel guilt or shame so what would I have to feel I would have to feel selfish comes to mind selfish and shame are really close to each other like so guilt would be I feel guilty for doing this thing y shame is I'm feeling guilty for being myself or I feel like I'm wrong when is something I've done is wrong what is I'm wrong they get very confused selfish selfish we could go off on forever because selfish just means you're not doing what your mom wants you to do generally um or whoever you know um when parents call kids selfish that's generally what it means um but I'm just saying like if you couldn't couldn't feel that selfish as a shame like what's the what's the key emotion underneath that you would have to feel if you couldn't feel like you were wrong for bad for not doing the thing maybe acceptance that comes to mind mind like acceptance that my Mom feels sad about this thing and I'm okay with that exactly where does the phrase I'm sorry come into this if if I'm let's say having this conversation with my mom I feel like I'm sorry it's like I'm I'm sorry you feel that way but then that comes across as it authentic and it's like I'm sorry is also a bit of an admission of culpability on my part and like how do you feel about the phrase I'm sorry I love the phrase I'm sorry I'm sorry is such a great phrase because it's actually one of the most successful transformational tools that you can that you can use so if you can do an upright what I would call an upright apology and we have like all sorts of documentation on how to do an upright apology on the website and whatnot if you can do an upright apology which means I am not leaving myself I'm not feeling bad about myself I'm just actually don't want I don't want to be like this in the future I don't want this to happen to you in the future yep and you're just like that's where you come from it is one of the best ways for you to stop a behavior so wait what do you mean yeah so um if you can say to somebody like oh I'm so sorry that I treat that I yelled at you right there yeah not with shame but just like oh I'm so sorry I yelled at you yeah and I can do that three or four times I will stop yelling yeah so if you do a really upright apology and you really feel it and you allow the feel but as soon as you go to shame then you get the stagnation like guilt and then you're going to keep on doing it over and over and over again but in the sense of I'm so sorry that I quit being a doctor or whatever the thing might be yeah so in that particular case then then the question is this I said to you earlier it's like oh I'm sorry that they did that yeah I'm not responsible yeah I'm just that that makes me sad that that happened like I'm that that sucks that's all it is and so it's just like yeah I'm I'm like I'm sorry it could be I'm sorry that I can't I can't be inauthentic to make you happy right now that would and I understand that that stinks or that's probably not quite right but something to the I'm sorry that I'm sorry that my choices are hurting you I I really do not want you to hurt okay nice and if the response is well if you were really sorry you would stop doing it yeah and my response would be no I'm I that would be doing something that doesn't feel aligned for me to stop you from hurting I don't want you to hurt but I don't want to have to do something that's not authentic for me to have you not hurt so it sounds like you're just selfish then absolutely I'm absolutely selfish I'm yeah I want to take care of myself I also want you to take care of yourself and whatever you need to do to take care of yourself given the choice I'm making I want to support you in it even if it hurts me how did you get so good at this what's what's the training program for for this this what I think the the big training program is to realize the thing that you're defending isn't there the thing that you defending isn't there yeah so if you're defending yourself no but I'm really I do it means that you actually think there's something bad in you okay there isn't okay so if someone said to me Ali you've got a really slow typing speed I wouldn't defend myself because I know objectively that my typing spe is really [ __ ] fast it's like it's just yeah okay kind of thing but if someone said to me Ali prick or like you can't feel your emotions yeah yeah this wouldn't be a problem if you could feel your emotions that I would you exactly where I'm like yeah you're right I can't feel my emotions maybe maybe it's something I need to work on kind of we only get triggered at the stuff that we actually think is true about ourselves ah yeah yeah okay yeah and so this is why reading negative reviews is kind of like ego destruction yeah exactly that's right and I'll give you a great example this I'm like we were just hiking at the and I was on that hike with a friend and he's like Joe you're a dick and I was like no I'm not you know but this is years ago no I'm not and he's like Jesus why defend it you're just a dick like take pride in the fact that you're a dick what's the problem I was like H okay let me relax into that for a moment I'm like yeah I can see ways that I'm a dick yeah okay I'm a dick and in that non-defensive the non-ending of being a dick I just stopped being a dick like it just like reduced like there I had a behavior where there was definitely a way like I would push to get something that wanted and that just that went away because I wasn't defending it anymore so the thing that we resist persists you've heard this before this is the resistance the defense is the resistance so there's like yeah we're all selfish yes I'm selfish I why would I defend that I'm not gonna I'm I'm not there's nothing I don't think there's some bad part of me that I have to prove as good so what's to defend and yeah the being able to take an attack and learn to keep an open heart destroys the ego take an attack and keep an open heart to the troll says the thing yep and you keep an open heart while reading it yeah and that'll create a ton of emotional fluidity it'll move a lot and it'll it just destroys the ego because the ego has to defend itself and oh I'm excited to read these negative reviews now in small doses no um okay I have so many things okay let's start with this um what is Enlightenment and would you say that you are enlightened okay so I I mean there's so many different versions of what enlightenment is and you know there are even within Buddhism there is which is where the term and some Hinduism where the term Enlightenment showed up I think Christ Consciousness is another example so there's a lot of things I I take a slightly more um Western psychological view of Enlightenment and so in the human development domains and so the way I think about and so maybe in Buddhism this might be considered Awakening some people would call it Enlightenment blah blah blah but the way I look at it is there's three ways to do it we'll just do two of them one is a sense of self so you're a little kid your sense of self is very solid and and we know that because if I say to a little kid what do you want for Christmas they say GI Joe with a kung fu grip you're like what do I want for Christmas GI with a Kung Fu Grip they can't really discern themselves from the world okay yep and then as they get a little bit older they can discern themselves from the world they're like I want a GI Joe with a Kung Fu Grip but Mom wants a Tesla dad wants a tie or whatever yeah and so our sense of self moves from that to oh I am the family I am the tribe I am the nation I am Humanity I am the ecosystem so as we develop yep we start seeing our sense of self as everything like and so people who are like I want to take care of the environment it's because I see the environment as them and that there there's an interdependence and it's not like something that's separate okay at some point at some point the sense of self becomes Universal again and it actually feels like a memory it's like oh I remember this that sense of self becoming Universal again where you're like I am everything and everything is me Y and there's some distinction you can go further on where it's like I am nothing I am everything but like let's just leave that out for now that moment is what people call Awakening or Enlightenment yep when that moment persists y that's usually what somebody would call Enlightenment okay yeah because I was reading um a book by Jed McKenna which is a he call it um abiding non du awareness yeah non-duality so that would be another way to describe Awakening or Enlightenment as non-duality I so that's that's the some from the sense of ey there's also a sense of time that goes along with it so little kids if you say to them oh your birthday's in like 3 months they could give a crap yeah birthday's in 3 days ah they get really excited the average American they can see out like three and a half years they can you they can think about things longer but they'll sign a mortgage y that will blow up in four years because they're not really considering and then you move into like seven generation thinking which is a the American Indians the the the Native Americans they would um they talked about like you couldn't really know a valley and or a location until you'd lived there for seven generations and when you're making a decision you're making a decision for Seven Generations that was like that thought process so you're actually thinking about the expanse of time like when your work stops mattering about like today or tomorrow and your start work starts mattering about future Generations this is kind of where that moves again there's this point where it kind of implodes on itself and infinity doesn't become a length of time it becomes like the depth of a moment okay so there's a sense of self sense of time and those are easy ways to see how that works in the system another thing that happens especially with like the mental one is that the oftentimes the negative selft talk y Loop will really change there won't be a lot of it because you start seeing through all your thoughts all your thoughts become true and not true and so none of them you take very seriously so you can't like someone's like oh that person thinks you're an [ __ ] and there's some part of you that's like huh look at that thought yeah I don't really particularly believe that and in that spaciousness is a lot of like lack of defensiveness and stuff like that okay that's a lot yeah nice this is good so um I am me I am my family I am My Tribe yeah but it's not like I am right like it's like I don't like my mom doesn't feel like she is me but she really cares about me yes so is that is that the same thing yes oh fine okay that's yeah that's the same thing and there are some friends of mine who really care about the environment I don't particular she really cares what your actions are and like where you live and everything she's very identified with you as her and her as you like she would be like my like so my kid if they did something embarrassing I'd be like that's embarrassing for them but I wouldn't say like oh my God I'm so embarrassed by what my kid did ah yes right because I'm not really identified in that way so identified mean like what does identified mean yeah so it means that I I'm a good way to say is like I'm taking it personally oh okay yeah yeah okay fine so huh it's like very hard for me to take things personally yep so are you enlightened so I don't really believe in the enlightenment term but yeah the voice in my head is like there's no negative repeating voice in my head my sense of identity is very Universal I am everything I am nothing that's true and and what was interesting about that is I was very identified with that for a bit very like look at me I'm this and now it's like you know it's like hair color it's like it's not it's not relevant okay interesting because I've been listening to some Alan wats lectures where he also talks about how like the the quest to destroy the ego becomes its own ego trip correct think yeah yeah so I mean I went through like many many years sitting on a pillow meditating looking out a window at a tree and reading nonel teachers like I just went through like trying my hardest to get to Awakening and like why uh how did this yeah how does this Vibe with the whole venture capitalist philanthropist being coach for CEOs who are billionaires kind of thing yeah where does all this fit into the picture uh historically it was I was doing Investment Banking I went to a Meditation Retreat I got a taste of unity Consciousness and I was like whatever the [ __ ] that is I'm after it and then I chased so so hard for it yep which made it harder and harder to like see that it was actually just what I was by my name so the more I chased the more pushed away how old were you at the time 25 years old something like that so 25 you had this experience in a Meditation Retreat yeah where you're like oh and then I dedicated my entire life to it for a decade oh okay yeah and I didn't do Venture Capital till 35 oh how do how do you dedicate your life to meditation do you I I made $112,000 a year I made almost no money I worried about money quite a bit Yeah I had all those things that people like so everybody out there who's like that rich guy he doesn't know about money did I was like actually yeah I was incredibly poor worried about money and stressed about it all the freaking time yeah and um but I just was totally dedicated to this thing I was I was a I was Avid about it and so I tried everything I could I I did meditation I did the Hoffman process I did somatic healing I did breath work I did everything I could possibly do for I I was dedicated to it you know I could do high pain work because I did International stock lending so I could go out and like make make a lot of money for a couple weeks and then I would just be back in the room sitting meditating for seven hours a day isn't that really boring my wife sure thought so um it wasn't for me no I got what happened somewhere along the line this question arose in me they just like what am I essentially and and it's not you know you can say I'm Joe or you can say I'm a human but like what is it that I've always been always will be that can't be taken away this never been changed and that question just naturally showed up 10 times a day and I was on a hunt to find the answer to that only to find out that it was the question that was the Brilliance not the answer yeah this is what I don't what's also talks about like the hell um yeah okay so you went on this 10y year long journey and then so what happened at the end of it I was taking a pee at a Meditation Retreat and yeah I was like oh I was I was okay so backing up for a second yeah so I was like lucky and unlucky I was unlucky in the fact that when I tasted it I put a lot of effort into getting it so and that really slows down the process the more effort putting an effort really slows down the process okay because it's the same thing as like you know ask for advice you get money ask for money get get advice like it's the same thing it's like if you're running after you're also pushing it away okay and so um and then and so that was very unfortunate but it was great because I got to learn a whole bunch of stuff and then at the moment when like I was going to the bathroom and it was like oh oh I am that basically was the answer which is a non- answer but the answer kind of evaporated yep and then the next thought was this never ends which is where I was very lucky and so this never ends was the thought and the reason it was lucky was because there's this thing that happens where people have that Awakening moment and they think they're finished yep but evolution doesn't end we don't stop evolving yep um and that's when your identity kind of gets solidified as the awakened one or something like that sure and so that luckily for me I know people who who stuck in there for 10 years yeah so like when I was there and I like I know those people identify that way I was just at a wedding recently and they're still identified that way and it will it will undo itself it just will take whatever time it takes but for for whatever reason I was very lucky in the fact that it was just like yeah this never ends like I there's never an end to the growth and to the movement which is why I Stray away from Enlightenment because Enlightenment seems to connote uh finished yeah done and that's not I haven't ever seen that and I know a lot of folks who a lot of folks in our courses have had Awakenings a lot of people in the meditation Retreats that I've done that's like it's not an uncommon thing in the circles and I and everybody's still is growing and but there is a there's a piece that you can access at any time and that's another interesting thing because that can become an emotional avoidance so I've seen people like access that piece like Alan Watts was a drunk as an example I like and his daughter will openly talk about it wonderful teacher amazing person but it was like it wasn't done it wasn't finished yeah and so yeah so it just like yeah it's just it's it's a NeverEnding thing but you can access this piece and in the access of the peace you can escape into it yep and what they it's interesting because you find those people and they're like yeah peace I'm like yeah where's the joy joy but I got the peace and at some point you kind of want to you get back into the human skin you get back into the emotional thing it kind of feels like you're going back into hell a little bit and then all of a sudden you learn to like move all the emotion and boom Joy okay so I so I've read a few of these texts I've res for Enlightenment Jed McKenna I recently finished a new Earth in Power of Now yeah and started reading Grist for the mill by ramas yeah and waking up by Sam Harris ages ago and stuff so it's like all of the things you're saying I I'm sort of connecting to the stuff that I've read yes um one thing came to mind when he said that it's it's never finished is that in Jed McKenna's book he there's there's this line where he says you know at some point along the journey you'll meet the Buddha and when you do then you should kill him yeah kind of thing and he he says in the book like don't think about this too hard like when you get to the point it will it will suddenly make sense and like but like for now just like ignore it kind of thing and a lot of these like spiritual teachings seem to also make this point that you that you made which is like the harder you try for it the the further it goes but also you kind of do have to try but also you don't really like have to try and it's all feels a bit hard to words to describe yeah so the so to geek out on this the reason for that is because the teaching is like pointed at what is in front of it and so I wanted to do this thing when I was in the searching mode I wanted to get four different teachers ask them the same questions and see how they answered differently and the name of the film that I wanted to call it was four fingers one Moon okay because they all answer it slightly differently but they're all kind of pointing at the same thing Y and so you can say you have to you have one way to say it is oh you have to like destroy the ego yep to become awakened the only problem is and then you're in a war with yourself called the ego right so then another teach but it's a good pointer it's a good thing like it's useful for a moment and then someplace along the line it's useful to say there is no such thing as an ego y like it doesn't exist it's it's you're it's a phenomenon that you made up in your brain it doesn't even exist it's just a concept and then that creates like a a a spaciousness so you can see something different so all they're trying to do in they're teaching even though they're a little bit different is to create enough space for a moment so you can actually feel what's actually looking out behind your eyes okay so if I want to shortcut the process spend 10 years meditating seven hours a day yeah yeah yeah not necessar what do I do um what's what's the process you'd recommend yeah so the process I would recommend is the the the part that I got right luckily was and by luck um is that I was doing the emotional healing work at the same time that I was doing the non-duality and I heard it expressed recently that a lot of time like the I thought this was pretty accurate that a lot of the like emotional holding makes it harder to see the truth of who you are yeah and so I think it works on that level but M but the other thing is I noticed that it's it's just natural for us to get there like this is just human development this isn't this isn't like spiritual or something special it's just like if you continue to like look at yourself and discover yourself see what you are pay attention it just is going to happen yep it's just its nature so it's like it's like saying how do I learn how to walk like you keep on kind of trying to walk and then then walking happens like does a baby actually try kind of but kind of not like it's just going to happen either way yep so it's it's a very similar thing to that it's like this is our nature yeah and and the interesting thing about it is because it is like a memory oh it's it's like it's always been there too which is really interesting and strange but like we don't ever in our work we never talk about it as a path to Enlightenment okay but you'll read reviews where it's like the person's like I [ __ ] meditated for seven years and what the hell are you doing I do this one little exercise and I have this Awakening moment what the [ __ ] now doesn't happen for everybody that was a right moment for him at the right time doing the right thing but it's not uncommon in our work but we never talk about non-duality we never talk about Awakening why it just happens because it often times when people start striving for it it gets in the way but but doing that emotional thing that's a great exercise for it like to like be undefended that like be undefended that that's a great if you want to do something but even that notice it okay you're going to go be undefended yeah is that a doing or is that an undoing is that an effort like try to effort being undefended oh interesting yeah right and so that's why they're pointing to it yeah you have to do something go be undefended so it's a doing but it's kind of not a doing because if you try to do it you're defended how how do you feel about the word spirituality it's like Christianity or or Buddhism or Judaism it's going to trigger somebody yeah yeah they're all pointing at the at at something similar with slightly different you know whatever you know there thumbnails all there are different thumbnails all at the same video so to speak and so I try to use words as much as possible that don't trigger folks yeah I try to just use like regular words and it's why I somewhat stay away from the you stay away from like the I like I never call myself a spiritual teacher yeah I and and I rather have it be like applied self-discovery like our conversation started with you know business and how to make money I want to think like these tools it's like how do we apply them to creating a world that we want to live in yeah they're not really useful otherwise if I just learn how to meditate I can fool myself all day long God knows I did for years yep whereas like if I'm actually interacting in the world and they're applied I know these things work I know what's real or more more real what what's your take on reincarnation multiple lives All That Jazz I have none yeah yeah I don't know it doesn't yeah it doesn't it's not that when you have that moment of Awakening you suddenly realize oh this is just one life out of 10,000 lives or some something like that things like that happen uh but to me it's like the way I look at it is no matter what my belief is I don't know how that's going to help anything okay I don't know like I don't know how that belief system or whatever the experience is that I can make a story out of yeah explaining it it's just living in the future in some other way I don't it doesn't ever seem to really be a benefit you know and they're usually turned into stories to create morality and morality stops us from listening to ourselves I'd much rather have people deeply listen to themselves because that's our nature and our nature is good so instead of being like that there is you know there are some things that are just right and wrong kind of thing which is what a lot of religious people will often say yes yeah so I mean this gets in a really touchy subject but it like to geek out on it for a minute um if your boss says you you got to like work twice as hard it's not going to be really fun you're not going to really enjoy it yep if you are sitting there working you're like oh wow I wonder what could happen if I do this twice as hard and I like can I do this twice as quickly and you like create a game with yourself it can be incredibly enjoyable so morality it takes the joy out of being moral like it becomes an obligation it becomes a sh it becomes something that I have to do and it takes a long time to actually get to the joy of it y but being good to people is joyful to being bad to people is disconnecting it's painful it sucks so I'd rather have people listen to themselves than follow an idea of what's good or bad how do you feel about the word should don't I don't think it's effective so I think um if there's if if anybody's listening to the podcast you probably have some habit that hasn't changed in a decade or five years or three years depending on how old you are that you've been telling yourself should change and the reason I know know that is because you're telling yourself it should change and the thing about all those habits haven't changed you're telling yourself they should change it's just not an effective mechanism for transformation H shoting yourself just doesn't work it's a resistance it's shame it's shame so it stagnates it's a resistance so it persists look at everything that did change the other way to do is the reverse look at everything that did change of who you are in the last five years and how many how many of those needed a should to change H surely that's like you know I I should be a less abusive spouse to my partner or like surely there are there are some shs that are genuine shs right I I think all the shs are genuine okay I I'm just saying that they're ineffective ah okay so if I'm saying I should be a better partner to my spouse it's not going to to make me better it's not going to help you be a better partner as I I want to be a better partner to my spouse it's going to be far more effective oh yeah yeah oh okay yep I should is like you know tell your kids you should they should do [ __ ] and it's great way to make sure that they don't do the [ __ ] that you tell them they should do on that note so I was uh I was giving a talk a couple weeks ago and a parent came up to me afterwards when I was like signing books and [ __ ] and she said hey you know my kids they're teenagers and I just can't seem to motivate them and like what advice do you have and I was like well I mean I'm not a parent so take this with a pinch ass all but like I didn't I didn't really know what what to say to her because I I I had a sense that like it's really hard for a parent to motivate a teenager like whatever that means yeah and I was like what are you trying to motivate them to do and she said oh I want them to take their studies more seriously I was like okay so that oh so that they they can actually get into a good University because at the moment they spend all their time playing playing video games and so I've been telling them that they should watch your videos and I've been trying to put your videos in front of them to say look at this guy you should listen to what he says and there was all this Shing going on I was like oh hello there's there's something here but I didn't quite have time to get into it and I didn't really know what to what to say to her so I just said look man all of these like Bros all all of these like super successful like teachers and stuff that I know their kids don't listen to them either so like you know it's probably all good but like how how do you approach that like a parent saying how how do how do I motivate my child to take studies more seriously I would say what are you trying not to feel I mean when you're telling their kid that they you should be different what you're basically telling them is they're not good that they're broken in some way that they need to be they they they need to be managed yep that that that there's broken so much that they have to be managed and controlled to be a good thing yep so like why the [ __ ] would you want to listen to anybody who thinks you're broken why would I would like that's not the person I like I want the coach who's like I see you as whole and complete and I know you're going to get there right that's who I want to listen to that's you know like criticize your kid all the time why would they even want to listen or be around you so to me it's like I have a great I love the teenage years I freaking love them and it's funny because I I mean I talked about the $2,000 thing which I've only paid for something like that like once for one kid and kind of this other weird time for another kid but my kids are totally naturally motivated because they just are listening to themselves kids who are listening to themselves they they're motivated kids who have been taught not to listen to themselves but listen to their mother they're usually not motivated unless the only way they got their mom's love is through achievement then they might be motivated but with a lot of fear some some parents will say well I'm not going to let my kid jump off a cliff that would be terrible and therefore when I see my kid doing doing this thing which I viewed to be the equivalent to him like taking cocaine you know if all your friends were taking cocaine would you expect me to just like step by and stand by and let you do it yeah yeah yeah how does this yeah yeah I mean if you're at that point you might need to but it's getting it's like preventing yourself from getting to that point like I meaning like that only happens after years of your kids being told that they're bad wrong and you criticizing them why else would they need to do cocaine but to like escape the negative voice in their head that you gave them I'm I'm being ruthless about it but it's absolutely true like I've never met like outside of of G there's some neurological atypical or some some chemistry but if that's the case you don't have much of a chance of managing it anyhow addiction comes with Shame Shame is the the lock that holds the chains of bad habits in place you want your kids not to have bad habits teach them that there's nothing that they don't need to be ashamed of themselves one thing we were talking about earlier is um hand in-and parenting yeah I wonder if you could just do a bit of a like a quick explainer of what is handon hand parenting and why is it why did you raise your kids using this methodology type thing yeah it's pretty much the same thing it's it's actually so the reason I did it is because my wife said we're going to do this and at this point in our marriage I had realized that she was right when it came to kids most of the time especially young kids okay so I had come up with a a a methodology and it was do whatever she says for 3 months and if I don't like it don't don't resist whatever she says do whatever she says for the first three months and if I don't like it at that point like but do a good at clean experiment on it yep so I did the clean experiment on what she wanted which was hand inand parenting and it was freaking remarkable and basically it's very much centered around that same thought process of like if they allow if you allow your kids to feel their emotions all the way through Express their emotions all the way through they get back to connection they're not overwhelmed anymore they go back to just being the kid that is like this wonderful loving child and if you look at little kids like two years old as an example if they see that you're out of atunement they'll go Dad I love you they'll like try to bring you back into Attunement that's how badly they want to be in Attunement and connection and so that's their nature and the job is to just help them live their nature which is to move the emotions through them so they can get back to connection so hand in hand parenting has five basic um rules and and Patty whiffler is much better to speak about this than than I am but it's uh having a place where you can uh off gas whatever emotions you're having about raising kids so in a way that's not going to hurt the kids um that's called The Listening partnership there's uh stay listening which is allowing their emotions to be big and just sitting in loving attention of them similar to what I was suggesting for you there's uh play listening which is playing with the kids so that the fear can move um and so it's like playing in a kind of rough housing way with kids so that they can actually move fear that's been moving through them um having gentle and firm boundaries uh which is like staying close and insisting it's like I'm the adult this is what we're doing it's just very gentle but very firm we're not going to go out of it and then the last one is uh going down the rabbit hole where you basically like have special time with a kid and you go into their world and join them you don't try to make them in your world you're just like tea tea it is let's do tea come on oh is that really an elephant over there you know and you're fully going down theit hole and so what sort of age group is this useful for like 0 to eight okay cool yeah and there's some usefulness and I mean I used this with CEOs when I was a VC like like it's the book is great even if you're not a parent that it teaches you so much and the doing it with the kids was a huge spiritual practice for me it was it is the thing that allowed me to feel all the emotions that allowed me to get to emotional fluidity because if my kids were sad I needed to feel it or I was going to be tied in a [ __ ] knock just stop just just eat a cookie and stop being sad or whatever the hell it was yeah because I guess it's easy to take it personally if your kid is sad or if your partner is sad yeah or you just don't want to feel sadness then you're going to get agitated you can be on a plane and if a kid starts crying like you can just stand up look at the entire plane and you're like you can just you weren't allowed to cry as a kid you weren't allowed to cry as a kid it's all the agitated people oh wer allowed to is is the book like what's the book called It's called Listen by Patty whiffler but the the organization is called hand-in-hand parenting and Parenting by connection and that is they have so many great resources so if you have if you have young kids and they have resources just like kids are biting this is what you do as long as you know the five tools it's pretty easy and we'll put links to all of that yeah um when you are rich how do you not spoil your [Laughter] kids yeah you know that's an interesting question so I I've thought about this a lot [Music] um so the thing about it is there's a difference between spoiling a kid and then teaching a kid that they of like buying off a child y so are you giving them money so that you don't have to feel an emotion or so that they don't have to feel an emotion that's one question Y what I notice is that kids who are used to having a certain kind of Lifestyle will probably maintain that lifestyle if they're like loved and like they're respected and supported so I don't have a problem in particular of like allowing them a particular lifestyle yep but what I'm not looking for them to do is avoid their emotions through money because that's where like the troubles start coming and the other thing is I don't want to hand them money unless they know they can earn it so meaning so I've seen there's this great family that I worked with for a while I just was so impressed with this they had hundreds of millions of dollars and it' been passed on generation to generation successfully and kept on growing and they're like okay if you don't want to make money then you just get x amount and you can like live comfortably but not great it's like you know good middle class job kind of thing if however you want to be a part of the thing and decide where the money is going to go and blah blah blah then you have to take a million dollars and start a company that gets you X millions of dollars they had like kind of this hurdle and if you did that then you could be because they didn't want anybody controlling the wealth who was scared of losing it oh okay nice because the because what happens in the second generation of wealth typically is that they get scared and get really tight and they're scared of losing it instead of which makes money go away yeah right like you as an entrepreneur I as an entrepreneur we take risks all the time that grows our money if we were scared as entrepreneurs our businesses would shrink and shrink and shrink and Shrink so I love that thought process so I'm thinking about it that way I'm not thinking about as spoiling as much yeah you cuz there are some people that I know who have decided that like the kids are going to get zero inheritance or that the kids are going to get only as much inheritances pays for their education and a house or whatever like do you have any kind of system like that or um I I mean once my kids are out of school I I won't be giving them money unless they have like a good reason you know like it's not like because I want to buy a car but it's like I will support you growing as a human with my money I couldn't think of a better way to spend it yeah but I'm not going to like throw money at you to solve a problem or anything so you can avoid an emotion nice yeah I haven't thought much about what I would do if I died with the money okay um I don't think it's going to make much of a I mean the way that my kids are with money right now is that they generally are respectful of it they appreciate it they're grateful for it yeah which is I think the most important thing is that they're just like they see it as a as a blessing for lack of a better word okay so bringing things full circle we started off the conversation talking about this relationship between uh money success fulfillment how do you become how do you achieve success while also enjoying the journey along the way yes and we kind of took a bit of a roller coaster ride through emotion through Enlightenment spirituality parenting all those sort of things I guess if someone's got to the end of this of this episode if you were to if you were to imagine the people you've coached they're all Successful by society's definitions yes by any stretch of the imagination uh but some of them are probably enjoying their life in feel fulfilled and some of them probably don't like what are the what are the key factors that differentiate someone who is Success successful and fulfilled and happy versus successful and unhappy yeah I what I notic is that there's seven key factors and and um it's actually what we what we teach in um like our long course and so I'll go through just some of them but they all kind of revolve around the same thing like one of them we've already discussed which is um wants are more effective than shoulds so if they're moving from their wants and they're willing to be vulnerable enough to share their wants and feel their wants like in this weekend I started with wants um what I know instead of shoulds they're far more fulfilled far more happy um if they focus on connection over Perfection is another one so Perfection like and whether this is a business where I want to make the perfect product or I want a product by create a product by connecting with my customers the second one's always going to work better than the first Y and so it's the same thing and like almost everything it's like there's some weird like if you're going to do a book you kind of like need to spend a little time with perfection because it's in print forever or whatever but um but the book that you try to make perfect is not going to be as good as the book that you really feel connected to connected to while you're writing it and connects to the people that you're writing it for so that's another one as an example love over defense we've touched about in a little bit as well people who still stay defensive rather than being openhearted even in their boundaries even in saying no even in you know actually being incredibly competitive in a in an in a business environment but still can be openhearted in that far more so those are some of the examples nice and where can people go to learn more about these if they want to find out the rest and yeah there's um a couple ways you can get on the website but also in our podcasts we have one podcast on each seven so and when we do the online courses what we do is we make the podcasts available for free and but the courses is where you know the exercises like what we did the other day where it gets really deep and really intense and you get to experience it in your bones that that we do in the coures Okay cool so we'll put a link to the YouTube channel the podcast the website and all the free stuff um and then if people want they can explore the paid stuff exactly I I'll be attending your ground Breakers course in a few months so that should be fun looking forward to it final question so I am turning 30 in about a week uh any tips on turning 30 yeah or any any advice for someone who's just about to turn 30 yeah a couple things are weird about well things I didn't know when I was 30 one is like oftentimes for men their Prime is 40 so you think that like there's some idea that you're kind of passing your Prime but somehow like 40 is like this time where like there's this Confluence of energy in your system your body is doing great your mind is doing great you've learned all this great stuff so that's one thing that I would tell anybody who's 30 is like don't like nothing is like nothing has gone over the cliff nor is it going to I I've actually liked getting older every year but but there's definitely like a feeling of primeness in the 40 years old I think the only other thing I would say is what I notic is that like from like 28 to 30s there's a major from 208 to 30 there's like a turning that happens in in humans generally they go from kind of thinking they know everything a little bit and they feel like that even if they're curious and learning there's kind of like this brash I can do anything kind of feeling and that starts flipping at 30 years old there's like a like a couple lessons to get learned and there's like wait I maybe I don't see things as much as I thought that I would see them um and it's uncomfortable but it's also like incredibly relieving at the same time because it allows it like it softens us in a way and so I would just say like enjoy the softening there's a lot like as we get older there's like less to prove less to show less to get to and like and if you can enjoy that softening often times things explode Blossom that you could never even imagine but it's also just super enjoyable to enjoy the Soph me Amazing Joe Hudson thank you so much pleasure thank you all right so that's it for this week's episode of Deep dive thank you so much for watching or listening all the links and resources that we mentioned in the podcast are going to be linked down in the video description or in the show notes depending on where you're watching or listening to this if you're listening to this on a podcast platform then do please leave us a review on the iTunes Store it really helps other people discover the podcast or if you're watching watching this in full HD or 4k on YouTube then you can leave a comment down below and ask any questions or any insights or any thoughts about the episode that would be awesome and if you enjoyed this episode you might like to check out this episode here as well which links in with some of the stuff that we talked about in the episode so thanks for watching uh do hit the Subscribe button if you aren't already and I'll see you next time bye-bye

------

So there is one thing that's messing up your decision-m and it's avoidance. Period. End of discussion. So first we have to agree on some semantics. We're going to make a distinction between choice and making a decision. Choice is something that happens all the time. Every second you're choosing to watch this. You're choosing to shut this off. I'm choosing to say this word. I'm choosing to say that word. But there's not a decision being made. And then there's decision making which is oh I'm sitting down and I'm thinking about what I'm going to do. So in decision making if you're there if you're already deciding the first thing that's happening is you're in fear. You're already thinking oh there's something that could go wrong and I have to make sure that it doesn't go wrong. That's what makes it different than a choice. And if you're in fear it means you're automatically trying to avoid something. So, if you think about a really hard decision that you have, typically what that means is that there's one outcome that you don't want, there's another outcome that you don't want, there's like maybe one outcome that you do want, and you're trying to figure out how to get it, but there's no way to 100% make sure that you get the outcome that you want. But here's the crazy thing. The thing that you're trying to avoid is an emotion. Meaning, nobody would say, "I choose to be homeless." But if you knew that being homeless would make you happier than you've ever been, more content than you've ever been, more satisfied than you've ever been, you'd at least be a lot less scared to be homeless, if not just completely okay with being homeless. So what we're trying to do is we're trying to avoid an emotional outcome. If I'm not worried about being a failure and I'm not worried about having ultimate success, well then it's easy to make a decision because I'm I don't have to try to stop everything from happening. I can just allow my best choice to come forth and then I go and do it. It's the same thing even in like a drug addiction or a choice to doom scroll. What you're doing is you're saying, "I don't want to feel a certain way or I do want to feel a certain way and so I'm going to avoid that emotional experience that I don't want by doom scrolling." And so that's how we make our decisions. And you get clarity of decision- making when you are able to totally go into and feel and love all the emotional experiences. But there's another part of decision-m is that we never think to automate our decision-m, right? So what does that mean automate our decision- making? So one of the ways that I have learned to not be avoidant in my decision- making is that I have a set of principles and I've thought about those principles a lot. I've played with them a lot. I've iterated on them a lot. I've run a lot of experiments and now when I have a hard decision, I go, "Oh, what would my principles do?" And I do the thing that my principles say to do. If I live by these five principles, I'm going to be successful. Period. end of discussion success as I measure it. I just know, oh, this is the thing to do. And it's a very disciplined approach, but it's only disciplined for a short period of time. At first, you're like, oh, I don't want to do that. But after a while, you start feeling like, oh, if I don't do the thing that my principles say, it doesn't work out. So, it doesn't take any discipline. It's like every time you do something, it works. And everything every time you don't do it, it doesn't work. It becomes very easy to do. And that's what principles do. Eventually, you're like, "Oh, that thing works, so I'm just going to keep on doing that thing." And it requires no discipline. And all of a sudden, your decision- making just becomes choices. For instance, one of my principles is embrace intensity. What that means is that I don't create intensity, but I embrace it. Meaning, I will feel into anything that I find to be uncomfortable if it's presenting itself. Why do I have that as a principle? It's because when I do that, I make clear decisions because I'm not avoiding anything. It's a simple principle that I live by. I'll do it every single time. And oddly, over time, it was I was embracing the intensity of fear or anger or failure. But then I was like, "Oh, I'm embracing the intensity of excitement, of joy, of pleasure, which by the way, far more intense." And as I lived my principle, it unfolded in such a way that it taught me how to allow for so much more joy and so much more pleasure in my life. And it's why in the decision-making course, one of the things we do is we really start teaching people about what principles are, how to create them, how to test them, how to iterate on them, how to make sure that they're the principles that you actually want to live by. One of the things we find out is that we are actually already living by a set of principles. Unfortunately, a lot of those principles aren't great principles. They're like, "Stay out of trouble, make sure everybody's happy, please people, be codependent, get angry when you don't get what you want." Like, those are the principles that you might be living by. And when you bring that into consciousness, you start seeing, oh, wait, that that those things aren't working for me. What is working for me? I don't actually know, but I can run some experiments to see what's going to work for me. And it's such a profound experience to just bring into light what you're actually already doing. Just that awareness in itself starts to change things. And then you realize, oh wait, I can change behavior to make decisions or I can make decisions to change behavior. This is a place where my principles used to say, "Oh, I'm going to get angry." But now my principles say, "I'm going to ask a how- what question." Now my principles say, "Oh, what is it that I'm not understanding here?" Now my principles are going to say, "I'm going to embrace that intensity of anger and I'm going to feel it in my whole body." And then something different happens. And so pretty soon you start to recognize when you really start living by your principles that the most efficient way to change your consciousness is to change your behavior. You just say, "Oh, I'm going to do something different 10 times and see what happens." That will change your consciousness. It's really, really simple when you do it this way. Figuring out how to do it is a whole another trick, which is why we created the decisions course. It's one of those few things that it's hard to like completely discover on your own. And it has been an amazing process to watch people have such a radical change in such a short period of time. And it's not just like, oh, I'm making decisions easier now. It's that the whole life improves. When you think about all your life is is a series of choices and decisions. From the moment that you're born to the moment you die, you make choices, you have decisions, and off you go. This is the life that you get. So when you improve that skill, everything improves. The relationships with parents improve, your job improves, your life improves because it is the quintessential thing that runs our life is the choices that we make, is the decisions that we make.

-----